
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	13 JUNE 1997	

NAME:	STHEMBISO ZORRO NJOLI

CASE:		EC0407/06ELN		-	MDANTSANE

DAY:		5

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------CHAIRPERSON: Sthembiso Zorro Njoli.

STHEMBISO ZORRO NJOLI: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I will hand over to Tiny Maya who is going to
lead you with questions on behalf of the Commission.

MS MAYA: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Sthembiso you are going to talk about
what happened to you in March 1990 when you were on your back to the
Sharpeville Day rally. Please tell us what happened.

MR NJOLI: We came out of Gombo Stadium. When we were, we were coming to
Mdantsane. The traffic cops were leading us and when we were about to be
in Mdantsane they decided to leave us and then the caspar came, soldiers
saying that we must, must control the crowd. When we got to, next to
Crave, next to Crave Meat Industries a hippo, the vans hooted at us and
when we were about the corner I heard gunshots. When I looked up I saw a
car, a red car, it was coming towards us. I ran away and I lost
consciousness.

	When I regained consciousness I was in a car, a bakkie. We were taken to
the hospital. I was told to take off my clothes. I lost consciousness
again. On the following morning the man who knocked down these people
came to see us in the hospital. Our doctor said that we were children
from the toy-toy. I heard that some of us lost their legs. I wanted to
know how. The doctor said that he is going to amputate me, amputate my
leg. I said that he must call my mother. My mother then visited me in
hospital. I told him, I told her that the doctor is referring to us as
children of toy-toy. Also the nurses were calling us children of toy-toy.

	I stayed there for four months. They discharged me in the fourth month.
I went to the hospital again for a checkup. The doctor said that he has
to cut my leg. I said that what is wrong with my leg, because I can be
able to work. I asked him why did you discharge me if I was not well. I
then went back home, went to the village. Again I felt pain in my leg. I
went to Bisho. From Bisho they transferred me to Cecilia Makiwane
Hospital. I decided to go to the attorneys so that this case can be
investigated. They did. We appeared in court. The man who knocked us down
was in court. We were told that the case was postponed, we will be called
again.

	34 People got injured in this incident, six died, 28 people sustained
minor injuries. I wondered what happened to other people, those who were
injured. My lawyer said that you are here on your own. They will find
their own lawyers.

MS MAYA: Sthembiso, what happened to your case?

MR NJOLI: Our case was held in 1995. November 1996 I received a cheque.

MS MAYA: Let us go back. You said that you were on your way from a
Sharpeville Day rally. The hippo disrupted you and you were knocked down
by a bakkie. Do you think that the driver of this bakkie did this
intentionally or was it accidentally?

MR NJOLI: In court he said that he was driving slowly, but he managed to
knock 35 people although he was driving slowly.

MS MAYA: Do you know this person? Was he politically involved or was
there any connection between himself and the police?

MR NJOLI: I do not know whether there was a connection between himself
and the police. I do not know whether he was politically active.

MS MAYA: In which political organisation were you a member of?

MR NJOLI: East London Youth Congress.

MS MAYA: You said that the doctor wanted to cut off your leg and you
refused. What happened?

MR NJOLI: I went to a specialist. The specialist said that I, my legs has
to be cut.

MS MAYA: At the time you were at school, in which standard were you?

MR NJOLI: I was doing standard eight.

MS MAYA: Did you manage to go back to school?

MR NJOLI: I went back in 1991, but I had a problem with my leg. I was at
Sangoma.

MS MAYA: Because of the pains in your leg you stopped schooling?

MR NJOLI: Yes.

MS MAYA: What are your requests to the Commission?

MR NJOLI: My request to the Commission is that the person who knocked us
down, I would like him to come forward to tell us the reason for him to
do that.

MS MAYA: You also mentioned medical treatment.

MR NJOLI: Yes, I am visiting Southernwood clinic for checkups.

MS MAYA: You also spoke about a training institution. Please tell us
about that.

MR NJOLI: I was a boxer and I was an athlete. I cannot do those things
anymore. I cannot train.

MS MAYA: Thank you Sthembiso. Is that all?

MR NJOLI: Yes, that all.

MS MAYA: Thank you. I hand over to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mr Sthembiso Njoli. We will try and investigate
this matter so that we can be able to find out that this is a political
issue or is it supposed to be in the Court of Law, because the Commission
is concentrating on political, political motive incidents. If the person
who knocked you down had a political motive we will try and investigate
that. Thank you.

	------------------------------

