	1	N E MAHLANGU


	1	N E MAHLANGU

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	03.12.1996	NAME:	E MAHLANGU

CASE:	JB02212	-	MOUTSE

DAY 2

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Is the sound clear, can you hear me?

MS MAHLANGU: Yes, I hear you.

CHAIRPERSON: Will you please stand to take the oath.

ELEANOR MAHLANGU: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Dr Ally will assist you in your giving
of evidence.

DR ALLY: Welcome to you Mrs Mahlangu. If you can just tell me who is
accompanying you.

INTERPRETER: The speaker is not audible. The speaker is not audible.

DR ALLY: I said welcome to you.

MRS MAHLANGU: That is Richard Mtolie, Richard Mtolie.

DR ALLY: Is he family member or a friend?

INTERPRETER: The speaker is not audible, please.

DR ALLY: Welcome to him as well. Mrs Mahlangu, in your statement we are
actually going back to the events which we were discussing earlier this
morning. The events of the 12th, the 13th and the 14th of May 1986. You
are coming to speak about your daughter, Sara, and what happened to her
on the day of the funeral of Mr Skosana. We just heard the testimony
earlier of his family members. So I am going to ask you to just tell us
what happened to Sara.

MRS MAHLANGU: In 1986 Mr Skosana was buried and there was confusion that
people were forced to go to the funeral and

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	2	N E MAHLANGU

nobody should remain behind. Sara and others went to that funeral at
Vlaklaagte number one. Then they met the soldiers, they threw them with
teargas. Sara became confused by the effect of the teargas. They said she
was hit by a bus at Vlaklaagte number one as the position was on the road
to go and bury Mr Skosana. I rushed to number one at depot. I found out
she was taken to Galafong Hospital. I said he was taken by Putco buses to
Galafong. Then when I arrived at Galafong the following day they told me
that she had died at night. The person who was with was Richard Mtolie.

DR ALLY: Sorry about that. Mrs Mahlangu, this is obviously something very
difficult and painful for you to have to relive. So I am just going to
ask you a few questions just to help us try and get a picture of what
actually happened. You said that people were forced to go to the funeral.
Do you just want to speak a little bit about this? Are you saying that
Sara was also forced to go to the funeral?

MRS MAHLANGU: They were pleading that no person should be left behind,
should go to the funeral. Even if you had money or not, you should go
there. We did not know those people who were announcing that message, but
they kept on saying nobody should be left behind. We should go and bury
Mr Skosana and then Sara was one of those people who went to number one.

DR ALLY: Did you have any idea of what was happening at the time? What
was your understanding of what was happening at that time?

MRS MAHLANGU: They told her that Skosana was killed by Imbokhoto
therefore he must be buried. I do not know the reason why he was killed,
but they just said Imbokhoto

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	3	N E MAHLANGU

killed Skosana so we plead with everybody to go and help with the funeral.

DR ALLY: And Sara was she in anyway involved politically? Do you know,
can you recall? In these events, either in the community or?

MRS MAHLANGU: I do not know, but on that day she went to the funeral.

DR ALLY: Now in your statement you say that she was actually hit by a
Putco bus, that there was confusion, there was teargas thrown and the
mourners ran in different directions. Did you ever take us this issue
with the bus company, with Putco? Was there ever a court case?

MRS MAHLANGU: I did not talk to them at all, even the Putco Bus Company,
I did not go there.

DR ALLY: So, with no one, not with lawyers or with, was there any
follow-up after Sara's death? Did you do anything or was Sara just buried
after she died?

MRS MAHLANGU: I did not go anywhere. I did not do anything.

DR ALLY: Mrs Mahlangu, thank you very much. Again, as I have said, it is
obviously a difficult thing to relate and it seems that Sara, again, was
one of those unfortunate people caught up in this conflict, but if there
is any further investigation that we can do on our side, we will
certainly try and follow-up on that. Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Mahlangu, I have a question to you to follow-up relating
to the Putco bus. According to our research and some statements we have
on that day, apparently, some 300 Putco buses were commandeered by the
comrades to take them to the funeral of Jacob Skosana.

MRS MAHLANGU: I do not know because people said only the

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	4	N E MAHLANGU

youth were supposed to go to the funeral and I did not see even those
buses taking the people to that place.

CHAIRPERSON: Alright, thank you. Then I have no further questions. Any
questions from Mrs Seroke? None. Mr Manthata. Well then thank you very
much Mrs Mahlangu for sharing with us. Again it all relates to that
fateful three days 12, 13, 14 and I think the more we will be hearing of
it the more we will know that those dates will stand out in the history.
Thank you for coming to us.













































MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



