TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23RD MAY 1997		

NAME:	MKIJIMA J MNGUNI

HELD AT:	BALFOUR

CASE:	JB3342				

DAY 1

____________________________________________________________________

DR ALLY: I think we would actually like to call Mkijima Mnguni to come
forward now if it’s possible because the incidents which Sipho was just
relating now, particularly with regard to Abram is directly related to
the testimony of Mrs Mnguni. If she could please. Mr Mnguni. We’re
changing the order. We’re sorry for that. We have changed the order of
the programme slightly to have Mr Mnguni to come forward. We thought that
it is appropriate given that the last witness was speaking about the
funeral of Abram Mnguni who was the son of Mr Johannes Mnguni and we
thought that it would be best to hear Mr Mnguni’s testimony now and we
will call Anna Motloung a bit later, so please just bear with us. Good
afternoon Sir, and welcome.

MR MNGUNI: Thank you.

DR ALLY: Mr Mnguni you’re coming to speak about your son Abram and the
events which led to his death and also the funeral. Doctor Randera is
going to assist you with your testimony but before I hand you over to
Doctor Randera, may I please ask you to raise your right hand to take the
oath. Just raise your right arm. Do you swear that the testimony you’re
about to give will be truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth,
so help me God.

MR MNGUNI: (sworn states)

DR ALLY: Thank you very much Mr Mnguni.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mnguni, good afternoon. I’m not going to spend any more
time. If you could just go ahead and tell us what happened on the first
of May 1986. The first of May is recognized as workers day. Just tell us
what happened on that day. Why there was a stay-away and then what
happened to your son Abram.

MR MNGUNI: I was at home. There was a girl standing with him outside. I
just heard from the girl that he’s been shot. It was the girl who alerted
me because I was inside the house. They were throwing teargas canisters
so I was inside he house because I tried to avoid being outside. The girl
approached me to alert me that my son had already been shot.

DR RANDERA: Did you then go out and see what happened ?

MR MNGUNI: Yes, I did. It was true, he was laying on the ground.

DR RANDERA: Was dead already by then ?

MR MNGUNI: I think he was dead.

DR RANDERA: Can you tell us what happened after that Mr Mnguni ?

MR MNGUNI: The boys took him into the cupboard. We could see that the
damage has been done and he was killed.

DR RANDERA: What occurred ? Did the other boys take him to the hospital ?

MR MNGUNI: Yes, they took him to the doctor. He was already dead. It was
just a formality to take him to the doctor because we were aware that he
was dead.

DR RANDERA: You want to now tell us what happened on the day of the
funeral. How many days later was the funeral ?

MR MNGUNI: It was on the thirteenth. They never allowed us to carry on
with the funeral. They harassed us and they kept throwing teargas
canisters on the day of the funeral. It was terrible and it was chaotic.

DR RANDERA: What happened after that, Mr Mnguni ?

MR MNGUNI: They took the corpse with and buried him themselves. I went to
them to find out where they had buried my son. They told me he was buried
in Greylingstad.

DR RANDERA: As I understand it, they just took the body away without any
permission from you and buried the body.

MR MNGUNI: That is correct.

DR RANDERA: And up to this day, you still don’t know where your son is
buried ?

MR MNGUNI: They told me that he was buried in Greylingstad. I went there
to try and locate the grave and there was one gentleman who knew me and
he pointed at the place where he was buried.

DR RANDERA: How old was you son, Mr Mnguni ? How old was Abram when he
was killed ?

MR MNGUNI: He was eighteen years old.

DR RANDERA: And he was still a student at that time.

MR MNGUNI: Yes, he was a student.

DR RANDERA: Do you have any other children ?

MR MNGUNI: Yes, I do have other children.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mnguni, tell us what was actually happening in Siyathemba
on that day ? You said earlier on that there was chaos and the police and
soldiers were firing teargas canisters.

MR MNGUNI: They had set the store alight and previously there was nothing
then they started. That was when things started. Turmoil. People were not
fighting.

DR RANDERA: Who set the store alight ?

MR MNGUNI: I do not know.

DR RANDERA: So as far as you know it was meant to be a peaceful day with
people protesting for recognition of Worker’s Day, the first of May and
then events got out of control ?

MR MNGUNI: Yes, there was nothing, it was quiet.

DR RANDERA: What about Abram himself, was he a Comrade ? Was he part of
the youth structures in Siyathemba ?

MR MNGUNI: Not to my knowledge. He never mentioned whether he was a
Comrade or not.

DR RANDERA: What would you wish to the Truth Commission to do, Mr Mnguni
? What is your wish ?

MR MNGUNI: I would like to have some compensation because I believe that
if he was alive, he would be taking care of me and supporting me.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mr Mnguni, I have not further questions.

MR MANTHATA: Mr Mnguni, where was the mother at that time ?

MR MNGUNI: You mean my wife. She’s around.

MR MANTHATA: And the mother couldn’t even have challenged the police to
take the corpse to ....................................

MR MNGUNI: No, she never made any attempt.

MR MANTHATA: As it is, if I understand you well, you talk of
compensation. You are not talking about the chance that the remains be
taken from Greylingstad to where you are right now ?

MR MNGUNI: Most of the people do suggest that the body should be exhumed
from where it is and buried locally.

MR MANTHATA: Who are these many, Mr Mnguni ? Who at the time of the death
of your child did not protest that he should be taken to Greylingstad but
now you say they would protest for the remains to be brought back to
where you are ?

MR MNGUNI: Those are Comrades I’m referring to who were present at the
time.

MR MANTHATA: In what Class was your son at school at the time ?

MR MNGUNI: I think he was in Standard Seven. That is Form Two.

DR ALLY: Please people. Can people please just settle down and be quiet ?

MR MANTHATA: What did his teachers say when he died and when he had to be
buried and when the police took the corpse and buried it where they
wanted it ?

MR MNGUNI: They said nothing to that effect.

MR MANTHATA: They couldn’t even help you to get to the police station
where the whole issue of the post-mortem or inquest could have been held ?

MR MNGUNI: No, nothing to that effect.

MR MANTHATA: No further questions.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mnguni, just one last question. Did you lay a charge at
the police station against the killing of your son ?

MR MNGUNI: Yes, I did.

DR RANDERA: Did anything come out of it ?

MR MNGUNI: They called me in. When I went there I was told that I was
talking nonsense and they will never pay me anything. The Government
won’t compensate me in any form.

DR ALLY: And the matter of your son being buried ? Did you take up that
matter as well, Mr Mnguni ? The fact that the coffin was taking away from
you and the family.

MR MNGUNI: I did take that further.

DR ALLY: How did you take up that matter ? What did you do ?

MR MNGUNI: I went to report the matter to the police at the police
station. I asked how they can they do ? They laughed at me and mocked me.
That was it.

DR ALLY: It’s very difficult to know what to day in a situation like
this. It was hard enough for you to lose your son in the way in which you
did and then on top of that for you and your family to be subjected to
that treatment where your son’s coffin is taken away and your son is
buried at a place away from your home and from the community. We have
heard your requests, your request for compensation. We’ve also heard what
you’ve said that members of the community have said that there should be
some form of justice and that your son should be re-buried in Siyathemba.
Also that the body should be exhumed from where it’s buried in
Greylingstad and we will certainly look into those requests. In the
recommendations that we make, we will certainly take into account what
you have said. Once again thank you very much for coming to speak to us
and to share your painful experience with us. Thank you.

--------------------------------------------











