


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 18.07.96			NAME: ABEL BAKANE BALOYI

CASE: 00545 - PIETERSBURG

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

ABEL BAKGANE BALOYI: (sworn states)

MR BALOYI: My father Johannes Baloi died, was killed in 1980 in January,
he was killed in Muhamathlala by the government's people. They assaulted
him, they removed his brain and eyes and he was taken to Kalefong
hospital in 1980.

	This feud started at Muhamathlala. When he came back from Kalafong he
stayed for two years, he was paralysed, he could not walk he could not
eat, he could not do anything because, I don't remember the other things.
I can't remember all of the things.

(confusion with the interpretation here)

	Our people were African National Congress, the others were TC, that is
Traditional Chiefs and we don't know what they were fighting about
because the TC and the Congress were fighting. I don't know what TC means
but it stands for Traditional Chiefs. These were the TC people.

MR MANTHATA: What were the TC people doing, were they beating people up
or were they supporting the people?

MR BALOYI: They assaulted people, they burned the houses, they took all
the cattle, goats and donkeys.

MR MANTHATA: Who was taking whose goats, whose cattle?

MR BALOYI: The government. The first government, I don't know which
government, whether it was the Lebowa Government or the South African
Government, but the government.

MR MANTHATA: What was he beaten for, either he belonged to the Congress
or he belonged to the TC.

MR BALOYI: My father was a member of the Congress, he was beaten because
he didn't want to go with the TC's.

MR MANTHATA: If I understand you well, you say the Congress people did
not want to go to the lines whilst the TC people were forcing people to
go to the lines.

MR BALOYI: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: In the conflict, where did the chiefs stand?

Was the chief on the side of the TC or on the side of the Congress?

MR BALOYI: That's what I don't know. I can't tell you whether he was on
the side of the TC or on the side of the Congress. I don't know many
things about the chiefs.

MR MANTHATA: ...(indistinct) of your family after the death of your
father?

MR BALOYI: Nothing, no one buried him. No we are now staying at Divane.

MR MANTHATA: ...(indistinct)

MR BALOYI: No we went away and built shacks somewhere in Divane.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you I have no further questions.

MR MALAN: Mr Baloi, if my sums are correct, looking at your ID number,
you were about 24 years at the time.

MR BALOYI: Yes I was 24 years old.

MR MALAN: Were you close to this when it happened, did your father tell
you about the attack or where did you hear about it, did other people
tell you?

MR BALOYI: What I'm saying here today, some of them I heard, some of them
I was not there, I was in Johannesburg. but some of them I heard.

MR MALAN: Did I hear you correctly saying that your father died only
later. Was it two years after the attack?

MR BALOYI: He died in 1985.

MR MALAN: I heard you saying that they removed his eyes and his brain and
they took him to hospital, that was the translation that came through on
the earphones, is that correct?

MR BALOYI: Yes that is true.

MR MALAN: When did this happen at the time of the attack or after his
death?

MR BALOYI: No it happened when they attacked him.

MR MALAN: I'd like to ask only one question. You have come to tell your
experiences to us today, to share your testimony with us. What do you
think the TRC could do for you. Is it to get the facts behind the death
of your father, what happened to him or do you have other requests? from
the TRC?

MR BALOYI: What I want the Commission to do for me, I want them to
compensate me because my mother has two children, she is not working, she
gets only a pension and we survive on that.

MR MALAN: Thank you.

MR BALOYI: Thank you.

(no interpretation here, only vernacular, there appears to be no
interpretation from Bapedi to Tsongo)

MR MANTHATA: Have you been following Mr Baloi?

MR BALOYI: Yes I was following it.

MR MANTHATA: You are needing a supporter to support you to come to the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. We are grateful, thank you.

MR BALOYI: Thank you.

MR MANTHATA: We are going to repeat, there are statement takers at the
back. If there are those people who still want to give statements, they
should go to the back and give their statements. Again there are some
head sets which are still missing. Those who want to borrow them, they
can borrow them but you must bring them back any time we adjourn.

	We also would like to inform you that amongst us here there are senior
people that we'd like to introduce to you. We have got the Mashamba
family, can you please stand up. There they are behind, thank you, and we
have Mr Godfrey Bitters who is with us here.

DR ALLY: We would like to welcome to the proceedings of the Truth
Commission, the mayor of Pietersburg Mrs Schofield, from the Premier's
office Mr Petty and the Director of the Northern District Mr Mkwane.
Welcome to the proceedings and thanks for coming.

	I also would like to inform you about the head sets, that they can only
be used by those people who don't understand the language which is used
here on the stage. You don't have to bother about them. Thank you.

	

