ANC Submission to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission



African National Congress
Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission



August 1996




===========================================================================
Contents




Executive Summary



ANC Statement to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission


1. PREFACE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. THE HISTORICAL AND INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT

   3.1 The prehistory of colonialism, dispossession and segregation
   3.2 The history of the ANC to 1960
   3.3 Just struggle in the international context
   3.4 Apartheid and human rights
   3.5 Apartheid human rights violations in an international context


4. THE NATIONAL PARTY, APARTHEID AND THE ANATOMY OF REPRESSION,
   1948-1994

   4.1 The post-1948 legislative programme of apartheid
   4.2 The repressive apartheid security state, 1960-1974
   4.3 The institutional violence and social consequences of apartheid
   4.4 Judiciary and other forms of repression
   4.5 Forced removals and forced incorporation
   4.6 Mass repression by the regime in response to mass protests against
   apartheid
   4.7 The height of apartheid repression
   4.8 Apartheid and the destabilisation of Southern African countries in
   the 1980s
   4.9 Covert action and state sanctioned gross violations of human
   rights in the negotiations era of the 1990s


5. PHASES OF STRUGGLE AND ANC POLICY FOUNDATIONS, 1960-1994

   5.1 New forms of struggle after Sharpeville and the banning of
   opposition groups (1960-1969)
   5.2 A changing scenario and new challenges (1969-1979)
   5.3 Towards "People's War" and "People's Power" (1979-1990)
   5.4 The ANC and internal revolt: The role of the Mass Democratic
   Movement in the 1980s


6. DID THE ANC PERPETRATE ANY GROSS VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS?

   6.1 The approach, standards and conduct of the ANC in relation to
   human rights
   6.2 Armed operations and civilian casualties
   6.3 Excesses in relation to state agents
   6.4 ANC members who died in exile
   6.5 The Mass Democratic Movement and excesses in the mass revolt of
   the 1980s


7. CONCLUSION: RECONCILIATION, REPARATIONS AND THE CHALLENGES FOR THE
   FUTURE

   7.1 The ANC's own conduct
   7.2 An approach to reparations
   7.3 Lasting reconciliation




Questions which require the attention of the Commission



Appendices


1. MK Code of Conduct
2. Deaths in Exile



===========================================================================



Executive Summary


[This summary serves merely to identify the primary issues in the
submission and should not detract from the matters raised in the main
document]


1. INTRODUCTION


The ANC supports the work of the TRC. By knowing what happened and why it
happened, South Africa will be better placed to ensure that the evil
deeds of the past are never repeated.

This submission aims to relate directly to matters within the TRC's
jurisdiction, while providing a context within which the points in the
submission can be better understood. It is neither a definitive or
comprehensive account of the period under review.


2. HISTORICAL CONTEXT


2.1 COLONIALISM AND RESISTANCE TO 1960

The process of colonial conquest lasted over two centuries, culminating
in the formation of the racially-exclusive Union of South Africa. In
1948, the National Party came to power and between 1948 and 1960,
legislation was introduced to give material meaning to previous racial
segregation and discrimination, to limit civil liberties and to suppress
political dissent.

Formed in 1912, South Africa's oldest national political organisation,
the African National Congress' core principles were to promote unity,
counter racism and work towards equal rights for all South Africans.

In the early decades of its existence, the ANC was conspicuously
committed to act within the law.

The Sharpeville massacre on 21 March 1960, and the subsequent banning of
the ANC signalled the beginning of a new era in South African history -
an era in which repression and conflict were to reach their peak.

2.2 THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT

The ANC was internationally recognised as a liberation movement. Various
UN resolutions on liberation struggles are significant in that they:

* legitimise armed resistance to forcible denial of self-determination;
  and
* allow third states to assist the liberation movements in their
  struggle.

It was argued, and accepted, in the UN that the self-determination of the
South African people had not taken place.

Thus, it would be morally wrong and legally incorrect to equate apartheid
with the resistance against it. While the latter was rooted in the
principles of human dignity and human rights, the former was an affront
to humanity itself.

An examination of relevant international conventions, declarations,
resolutions, judicial decisions and the practice of the United Nations
and its organs and the practice of regional organisations and states
yield affirmation of the following propositions of international law in
relation to the apartheid regime:

* Gross and systematic violation of the provision of the Universal
  Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, especially those provisions which
  must now be regarded as part of customary international law;
* Apartheid often produced outcomes similar to those of genocide - a
  practice now proscribed by the international community, leading to
  criminal sanctions;
* The policies of apartheid were a negation of the United Nations
  Charter and against humanity, thereby giving universal jurisdiction for
  its suppression and punishment, on general principles and by treaty.

The South African regime had no right to represent the people of South
Africa, its illegitimacy arising from systematic breaches of peremptory
rule of international law.


3. NATIONAL PARTY, APARTHEID AND REPRESSION


Apartheid was founded on, and represented an intensification of, the
colonial system of subjugation of Africans, coloured and Indians.

To entrench and defend Afrikaner and white dominance, the NP set about to
transform the judiciary, the army, the police, intelligence services,
academia, the civil service, economic and labour relations and
parastatals; and it increasingly relied on force.

Apartheid oppression and repression were therefore not an aberration of a
well-intentioned undertaking that went horribly wrong. Neither were they,
as we were later told, an attempt to stave off the 'evil of communism'.
The ideological underpinning and the programme of apartheid constituted a
deliberate and systematic mission of a ruling clique that saw itself as
the champion of a 'super-race'.

3.1 APARTHEID REPRESSION

From the outset, the National Party introduced a combination of social
and repressive laws to pursue its overall political and economic
objectives.

During the 1960s the government's transgression of human rights became
more blatant. Central to the new authoritarianism were sweeping
restrictions on political behaviour; an increase in the powers of the
police and further subversion of the independence of the courts; and
sweeping provisions for detention without trial that created conditions
in which the use of torture during interrogation became widespread.

From its inception in the early 1960s, the security legislation and its
implementation have generated widespread reports of mental and physical
abuse of people held in detention. Individual officers abused their
powers of interrogation; interrogation became torture; torture became
routine.

3.2 INSTITUTIONAL VIOLENCE AND SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES

During the 1960s, concurrent with the new security legislation, the
apartheid rulers embarked on radical new forms of social engineering
designed to entrench white minority rule. Instances of such "bureaucratic
terrorism" included:

* huge numbers of arrests for contravention of pass laws;
* large-scale forced removals and resettlements;
* the redefinition of all Africans as 'citizens' of ethnic bantustans.

Basic apartheid measures systematically denied black South Africans
'first generation' rights like the franchise, civil equality, freedom of
movement and freedom of association. The social order underpinned by
apartheid also ran roughshod over 'second generation' rights, such as the
right to education, health care, security and social welfare.

3.3 JUDICIAL REPRESSION

Whole sectors of South African society - the law courts, churches, media,
education, business, sports and cultural sectors - both actively and
indirectly reinforced apartheid exclusion, discrimination and the
violation of human rights.

The South African judicial system was racially and ideologically biased
in the interests of the apartheid system. Selected judges were in many
cases put in charge of political trials and were responsible for the
judicial murder of people fighting against apartheid. In many cases
judges allowed evidence that was extracted under torture or duress.

Judicial commissions produced ideologically-oriented reports which
promoted the goals of the apartheid state. Law societies and bar councils
struck from the roll anti-apartheid activists convicted of political
crimes.

The catalogue of legal discrimination and injustice that occurred under
apartheid needs to be acknowledged if a human rights culture is to
flourish in the new South African legal system.

3.4 MASS REPRESSION IN 1970s

In the early 1970s, spontaneous and organised mass resistance started to
surface for the first time in a decade. The response of the regime was
brute force. The actions of the regime in 1976/7 brought out in bold
relief the government's intention to deny human rights at all costs.

Notes taken by then Minister of Police Jimmy Kruger illustrate this:

"10.8.76 Unrest in Soweto still continues. The children of Soweto are
well-trained. The pupils/students have established student councils. The
basic danger is growing black consciousness, and the inability to prevent
incidents, what with the military precision with which they act. The
minister proposed that this movement must be broken and thinks that
police should act a bit more drastically and heavy-handedly which will
entail more deaths. Approved."

3.5 TOTAL STRATEGY IN 1980s

The National Security Management System (NSMS) was instituted in 1979 as
an attempt to ensure maximum coordination of practices already in use in
line with the government's 'total strategy'.

This period saw the genesis of a trend towards increasingly sophisticated
covert operations, continuing into the 1990s, which included illegal
methods to suppress and disrupt the resistance movement. In addition to
attempts to bolster the discredited bantustan and community councillor
systems, there were renewed attempts to find or 'create' credible
alternatives to the ANC.

The State Security Council (SSC), which was at the apex of the NSMS,
although technically a committee of the cabinet, usurped many of the
cabinet's executive functions. Ultimate control of the SSC and NSMS was
vested in the Office of the State President. It controlled a totalitarian
network which reached into every part of the country.

Repression during this period assumed both a formal and an informal
nature. Formal repression included:

* Successive states of emergency, covering a large number of
  magisterial districts, were in operation from 1985 to 1989.
* Over 80,000 people were detained without trial, some for periods of
  up to two and a half years. This number included over 15,000 children
  and around 10,000 women.
* Over 10,000 detainees were tortured, assaulted or in some way abused.
* More than 70 detainees died in detention.
* Several newspapers and publications were banned, suspended or
  restricted.
* Many were sent to jail and others executed.
* Over 100 organisations were banned or restricted.
* Outdoor political meetings were banned, and numerous indoor meetings
  and funerals were broken up, banned or restricted.

In addition to these overt repressive measures, a whole range of covert
activities were conducted by the state or its proxies.

One of the tactics used was that of counter-mobilisation. During 1985 and
1986, a range of front companies were set up in South Africa to
orchestrate 'black-on-black' violence, foster viable alternative
'liberation movements' and spread NP propaganda. No fewer than 23
sub-projects were running in Namibia and South Africa in 1986, some of
them with agents in the media.

Another tactic was the use of vigilantes and surrogates to perpetrate
violence against democratic formations. During the course of 1985 various
'vigilante' groups and bizarre criminal gangs suddenly appeared in
townships all over the country. 'Kitskonstabels' were introduced in late
1985, mostly to bolster unpopular community councillors.

Operation Marion, which involved the training of an offensive
para-military unit of IFP supporters is currently the subject of the
KwaMakutha massacre trial.

Plans were also being drawn up in mid-1986 for the formation of a 'Xhosa
Resistance Movement', which would in nature - and even extent - be
similar to Inkatha and would together with our security forces form a
counter-revolutionary front.

Linked to this was the use of state-sanctioned 'hit squads' in
extra-legal terror and assassinations by the Civil Co-operation Bureau
and Vlakplaas police unit.

The Human Rights Commission recorded around 100 assassinations and around
200 attempted assassinations of anti-apartheid figures inside and outside
the country between 1974 and 1989.

The apartheid regime did not shrink from the use of poison in its
attempts to murder its opponents. In 1977 agents attempted poisoned the
food of some 500 MK cadres undergoing training at Catengue camp in Angola.

The cases of Siphiwo Mthimkulu, Frank Chikane, Thami Zulu, and an attempt
to kill Dullah Omar are some of the better known examples of the use of
this tactic.

Further, "Project B", a top-secret, multi-million rand project run by the
former SADF, included chemical and biological weapons projects, which was
still operational as late as 1993.

It has been alleged by people close to these programmes that research on
organophosphates and cancer-inducing agents were carried out, and even
President Mandela was considered a target.

3.6 DESTABILISATION IN THE 1980s

Total Strategy included destabilisation in neighbouring countries. In a
Commonwealth report of 1989 this destabilisation during the 1980s is
described as having reached "holocaust" proportions. The report added
that at the time the human cost was 1,500,000 dead through military and
economic action, most of them children, while a further four million had
been displaced from their homes. The economic cost to the six Frontline
states was estimated to exceed 45 billion US dollars, not to mention the
destruction of agriculture, industry, education and health care in
countries like Mozambique and Angola.

Among the external destabilisation methods used by the apartheid state
were:

* Armed action, ranging from sporadic commando raids into several
  neighbouring countries, to full-scale invasion as occurred in Angola.
* Hit squad raids to abduct or assassinate political opponents, mostly
  people connected to the ANC.
* The encouragement or even creation of surrogate anti-government
  forces through logistical support, intelligence and training, as in
  Malawi, Swaziland, Lesotho and Namibia.
* Economic pressures to create and maintain a dependency on the South
  African transport, harbour, custom and financial systems.

Through a number of cross-border raids, supposedly to attack 'ANC bases',
the SADF showed callous disregard for the lives of civilians. These
attacks were characterised by a "shoot first, and ask questions latter"
approach.

3.7 COVERT ACTION AFTER 1990

State terrorism and covert operations by the apartheid government and
security forces did not end with the unbanning of the ANC and other
organisations in 1990, and the formal commencement of negotiations.

The consequences of these campaigns against the democratic opposition
were far worse than anything experienced in the emergency years. Between
1990 and 1993, nearly 12,000 civilians were killed and 20,000 were
injured in thousands of incidents, including several major massacres. The
Human Rights Commission recorded the accelerating pace of assassinations
of anti-apartheid figures: 28 in 1990, 60 in 1991 and 97 in 1992.

A top secret document dated 13 March 1990 stated that FW de Klerk was
"briefed on a broad spectrum of sensitive projects" and had given his
approval "in principle" on "the running of Stratkom projects".

The document also states that "covert stratkom projects are controlled
and managed by the secretary of the SSC. . . The Secretary of the SSC
receives decisions and orders in this regard from the State President and
passes them on to the departments concerned".

Even if the structures were renamed, the security committees chaired by
SAP and SADF officers from local to national level remained in place. As
the official National Co-ordinating Mechanism manual notes: "the
principle of the application of the full powers of the state in order to
resist the revolutionary onslaught is still valid."

There have to date been partial, yet telling revelations of the nature an
extent of covert operations in the post-1990 phase. To name just a few
examples:

The admission by Orde Boerevolk "hunger strikers" after their escape to
the UK that they were Military Intelligence agents with a specific brief
to destabilise black communities and the ANC.

The November 1992 Goldstone Commission raid on Pan Afrik Industrial
Investment Consultants, a Directorate: Covert Collection front company,
which provided partial glimpses of other operations, such as those aimed
at subverting Self-Defence Units.

There are a few key operatives and commanders who know exactly how these
networks functioned, and can help shed light on how extensive this
network was; what has happened to it; and what capacity it still has for
destabilisation.

FW de Klerk and the then ruling National Party have the responsibility to
inform the nation about this machinery and whether part of it is still
operational today.


4. PHASES OF STRUGGLE AND ANC POLICY FOUNDATION


4.1 NEW FORM OF STRUGGLE AFTER SHARPEVILLE

The ANC announced its adoption of armed struggle on December 16 1961. The
MK manifesto explained that armed activity was necessary because of state
violence and curtailment of extra-parliamentary politics.

From the beginning, MK emphasised the supremacy of politics over narrow
military activity: in the choice of targets, attitude to civilians,
attitude to the white community, and treatment of any captives.

However within its own ranks, debate would rage unceasingly - especially
in periods of brutal actions by the regime against unarmed civilians -
about the correctness of such restraint. But at all times, the principled
approach of the movement would prevail.

4.2 NEW CHALLENGES 1969-79

The 1969 ANC Consultative Conference in Morogoro adopted a new programme,
Strategy and Tactics of the ANC, which looked to eventual ANC 'conquest
of power' in South Africa and accepted the need for a protracted armed
struggle.

Military struggle was seen as forming only part of, and being guided by,
a broader political strategy to ensure that the battle against apartheid
was fought on all possible fronts.

It was thus difficult to resist the temptation to spread such structures
and armed actions in an opportunistic fashion. But, even under pressure
the ANC asserted its political position: that the politics of the ANC
should guide whoever carried out operations on the basis of its training
and supplies.

It is from such contacts that arrangements were being made for Steve Biko
to meet Oliver Tambo. This information was leaked by agents of the regime
such as Craig Williamson, leading to Biko's arrest and ultimate murder.

4.3 PEOPLE'S WAR AND KABWE

The crucial strategic emphasis which shaped the struggle from 1979
onwards was the necessity for an organised underground political presence
to complement armed activities.

In line with this approach, the Revolutionary Council formed in 1969 was
restructured to consolidate not only the supremacy of political
leadership but also to ensure the task of mass mobilisation and
underground organisation received the necessary emphasis.

A special operations group was formed with the mandate of undertaking
high profile attacks such as the Sasolburg oil refinery, Koeberg,
Voortrekkerhoogte.

At the same time operations by other MK units mounted steadily. One study
estimated that 150 cases of armed action took place between 1976 and
1982, overwhelmingly concentrated on economic targets, the administrative
machinery of apartheid, the police and SADF installations and personnel.

The tension between such intensification of struggle and the need to
avoid a racial war remained with the movement until the last day of the
armed struggle.

An instance of this was the debate within the national leadership during
the 1981 anti-republic campaign on the choice of targets: when the
leadership rejected a proposal to decimate the NP government leadership
at a Bloemfontein rally.

At the Kabwe Conference in 1985 consensus was reached on a number of
questions, including the approach to military action. Conference
reaffirmed ANC policy with regard to targets considered legitimate. But
the risk of civilians being caught in the crossfire when such operations
took place could no longer be allowed to prevent the urgently needed
all-round intensification of the armed struggle.

It was during the mid-1980s that certain attacks on targets with no
apparent connection to the apartheid state took place. In some cases
these attacks were the result of the 'grey area' which had been a result
of anger and/or misunderstanding of ANC policy.

The ANC took action to assert policy with regard to the avoidance of
civilian targets, which had in some cases become confused with the need
to intensify the struggle 'at all costs'. The January 8th, 1987 statement
said MK:

"must continue to distinguish itself from the apartheid death forces by
the bravery of its combatants, its dedication to the cause of liberation
and peace, and its refusal to act against civilians, both black and
white."

In late 1987 MK commanders were instructed by OR Tambo and the NEC to go
to all forward areas and as far as possible also to meet with units
operating inside the country to reassert ANC policy with regard to the
avoidance of purely civilian targets. Failure to comply with these orders
would be considered as violations of policy and action would be taken
against offenders.

The ANC is immensely proud of the bravery, discipline and selfless
sacrifices of its MK combatants. They were prepared to work under
conditions in which, if captured, they faced the possibility of being
tortured to death, abduction and secret execution, combined with intense
pressure to become collaborators or be murdered. They also faced summary
executions whether they surrendered or not, and hanging or extremely
lengthy prison sentences should they come to trial.

Given these conditions it is remarkable that very few attacks by MK
personnel violated ANC policy with regard to targets with no direct
connection to the apartheid regime.

4.4 THE ANC AND INTERNAL REVOLT

While the ANC pursued its concerted campaign against apartheid from exile
and the underground, the internal struggle became increasingly organised
through the trade union movement and re-emerging mass-based political
movements.

The formation of the United Democratic Front as a broad internal
anti-apartheid umbrella body transformed the South African political
landscape. Despite the identification of the UDF and later the Mass
Democratic Movement with the ANC, they were essentially separate bodies,
and not direct extensions of the ANC.

From 1985 until well after the unbanning of organisations, the apartheid
system relied on naked terror and violence to destabilise and disrupt
opposition to apartheid.


5. DID THE ANC PERPETRATE ANY HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS


5.1 ANC APPROACH TO HUMAN RIGHTS AND CONDUCT

It was the policy of the ANC - ever since the formation of MK in 1961 -
to avoid unnecessary loss of life. The ANC has never permitted random
attacks on civilian targets.

Once MK camps were in existence, part of the training of every MK
combatant was political and included an insistence that the enemy should
not be defined simply in racial terms. When the ANC became a signatory to
the Geneva Convention on the conduct of war in 1977 it was reported to be
the first liberation movement in the world to take this step.

However, the morality of the ANC, its objectives then and now, and
standards it set itself dictate that we examine the conduct of struggle
critically, and acknowledge where errors took place.

5.2 CIVILIAN CASUALTIES IN ARMED OPERATIONS

The 1983 car bomb attack on SA Air Force headquarters in Pretoria is an
example of this nature. Nineteen people were killed in the attack, of
which at least eleven were SAAF officers. Over 200 people were injured,
of which over 70 were members or employees of the armed forces.

Many of those injured may have not been military officers, but were
employed by the SAAF, and had thereby directly associated themselves with
apartheid military aggression. The location of the HQ of an arm of the
SADF responsible for cross-border air raids in a concentrated civilian
area was itself a violation of protocols of war.

The ANC's limited use of landmines provides another example of this
nature. Though it was easier said than done, Military Headquarters
continued to stress policy regarding careful reconnaissance and avoidance
of civilian targets.

While regretting all loss of life, the ANC notes that the apartheid
regime had declared white border farms military zones, with white farmers
integrated into the security system and provided with the tools of war,
including automatic weapons.

The much publicised case of the car bomb explosion at the Magoos and Why
Not bars in Durban on June 14 1986 provides another case in which
civilian casualties occurred in the context of the intensification of the
armed struggle.

The operation was carried out during a time of extreme political upheaval
in the country, which culminated in the declaration of a nation-wide
State of Emergency on June 12. The attack was carried out to commemorate
the June 14 1985 raid on Gaberone, in which 12 people were killed (of
which only five were ANC members and none was MK). The Magoo's attack was
also carried out to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the June 16 1976
uprising.

The Why Not bar was targeted because it was frequented by off-duty
members of the Security Forces.

From around December 1985, and particularly during the period from April
1986 to September 1988, a number of attacks on civilian targets with no
connection to the state occurred.

With regard to those attacks on 'soft targets' for which MK personnel
were responsible, the ANC does not seek to justify such attacks, but
insists that the context in which they occurred is relevant.

The ANC has acknowledged that in a number of instances breaches in policy
did occur, and deeply regrets civilian casualties. The leadership took
steps to halt operations in conflict with policy.

The December 1985 blast in an Amanzimtoti shopping centre, in which five
people were killed and over 40 people injured, provides a clear example
of the manner in which the behaviour of the apartheid regime was a
significant factor in provoking certain attacks which were in breach of
policy.

Andrew Zondo, aged 19, admitted to placing a bomb in a rubbish bin in the
Sanlam Centre in Amanzimtoti on 23 December 1985.

On December 20 1985, the Pretoria regime had launched a raid on Lesotho
in which nine people were killed. In anger, Zondo left a bomb at the
shopping centre.

Andrew Zondo spoke with unmistakably sincere regret for the deaths which
had occurred. Those responsible for the Lesotho massacre received medals
at a secret ceremony. Zondo was sentenced to death five times and refused
leave to appeal.

In many cases which will come to the attention of the Commission, attacks
on civilians and civilian targets for which the ANC or other mass
democratic organisations were blamed were in fact the work of the state:
"false flag operations".

In 1981, the former commissioner of police, Johann van der Merwe, claimed
that the SAP were aware of the ANC's "dissatisfaction" with Griffith
Mxenge's handling of funds sent to him from abroad. The clear inference
was that the ANC was responsible for the murder of Mxenge. The murders of
Matthew Goniwe and his comrades were similarly ascribed to "UDF/Azapo
conflict".

In January 1989, Minister of Law and Order Adriaan Vlok said the police
suspected that "trained guerrillas" had been visiting Khotso House,
following an explosion there. Former Vlakplaas operatives have
subsequently claimed that they were responsible for the attack, and that
Vlok in fact congratulated them for this action.

Certain attacks on civilians - including necklacings and attacks on a
cinema and restaurants - were in fact carried out by agents of the
apartheid state in their continuing attempts to damage the image of the
ANC.

5.3 PEOPLE'S COMMITTEES AND SELF DEFENCE UNITS

In the mid-1980s the apartheid state went on a full-scale offensive.
Communities began to take steps to defend themselves through establishing
what were variously called defence committees, people's militia or
self-defence units. The ANC actively encouraged initiatives of this
nature on the part of the people. The ANC discussion document titled
Broad Guidelines on Organs of People's Power envisaged the development of
a system of 'layers' of cadres organised into self-defence units, combat
units and MK officers respectively. Each 'layer' had a different function
relative to the level of military training received and political control
exercised by the ANC.

In so far as any excesses of those combat groups set up by, and SDUs
linked to, the ANC, these should be understood in the context of MK
operations.

On 6 August 1990, the ANC formally committed itself to a cessation of
armed hostilities. Between late August and late September 1990, over 700
civilians had been massacred in attacks on homes, train commuters, and
gatherings such as funeral vigils.

Resolutions at the ANC's December 1990 Consultative Conference committed
the ANC to assisting people in setting up accountable and non-partisan
SDUs. After the 1991 ANC National Conference, some members of Military
Headquarters were tasked to attend to the organisation, training and
provision of weaponry to SDUs. It was, however, made clear that the
overall control of SDUs was to remain with community structures and the
MK cadres were to participate as members of the community.

By September 1991, mobile specialist hit-squads had started to take over
the work previously done by large identifiable political groups. The
second major thrust of the state offensive to prevent SDUs from defending
their communities was to infiltrate and subvert them.

The notorious Phola Park SDU - which was headed by a police informer,
'overthrew' the popularly-recognised Resident's Committee and conducted a
reign of terror in the area - was a prime example of the latter.

5.4 EXCESSES IN RELATION TO STATE AGENTS

The ANC set up a fully-fledged Security Department in 1969. At the
beginning, the ANC was faced with the real constraint that it was
operating from abroad, initially with weak underground structures within
the country and a mass movement that was only starting to emerge.

Given these circumstances, the ANC wishes to submit that it conducted
itself well: above all, by ensuring the survival of a liberation movement
which, at the beginning, had everything stacked against it. Yet we do
acknowledge that, in the context of this work, excesses did occur.

The 1976 mass exodus of youth coincided with an increase in the number of
state agents sent to infiltrate the ranks of the ANC.

The first major instance of their work was the poisoning of food at the
Catengue military training camp in Angola in September 1977, where close
on 500 trainees were poisoned.

In 1979, the regime launched an air raid on the same camp, the timing and
choice of targets indicating clearly that they had information about the
outlay of, and routine in, the camp.

At the same time, a number of cases of cadres deployed within the country
exposed the fact that there were some state agents within some commanding
structures of MK.

In 1981, this started to take the form of overt agitation against the
leadership, particularly in Lusaka, Zambia. In the camps, bizarre
incidents of indiscipline by a minority of cadres had started to play
themselves out.

In addition to attempting to murder cadres and passing on intelligence on
military installations, this network and its various subsidiaries
supplied information on the movements of leadership figures, carried out
surveillance on ANC residences, sent the enemy information on the
children studying at Mazimbu, committed various acts of sabotage and
stirred up discontent.

This network was uncovered in 1981, and several of its members were
executed after their cases had been heard by a Tribunal. It should also
be emphasised that some of those arrested were either falsely implicated
or had merely shown signs of ill-discipline rather than being state
agents per se. Many of them were later released and apologies tendered
for wrongful arrest.

Faced with this new situation and realising the dangers; and faced also
with agents who refused to divulge strategic information though
confronted with convincing prima facie evidence, excesses were committed.

These excesses are detailed in the Motsuenyane and Skweyiya Commission
reports. From these reports and evidence led, it is clear that:

* Some of the details are accurate, and yet others are exaggerated or
  part of deliberate attempts to mislead the commissions.
* While the cadres responsible for the detention centres may be
  directly responsible for the excesses, the leadership of the Security
  Department did not take sufficient steps to correct the situation.
* When information to this effect reached senior organs of the ANC,
  lengthy meetings were held by the NEC to uncover the details and
  introduce corrective measures.

The ANC highly regrets the excesses that occurred. Further, we do
acknowledge that the real threat we faced and the difficult condition
under which we had to operate led to a drift in accountability and
control away from established norms, resulting in situations in which
some individuals within the Security Department started to behave as a
law unto themselves.

Much has been said in public about the Morris Seabalo Centre, referred to
also as Camp 32 or Quatro. The conditions in this detention centre, which
are graphically illustrated in the commission reports, should be
considered against the 'norm' which existed in general in the camps,
given that conditions in any guerrilla military establishment are very
difficult and abnormal.

The ANC also had to deal with instances of mutiny. Like all other armies,
MK had rules about dealing with mutineers.

The most serious one broke out in Pango in 1984. Those responsible used
machine-guns and other heavy weapons to attack the command of the camp,
killing members of the command and other soldiers. A military tribunal
was set up by the NEC and two groups of mutineers were tried, seven of
whom were given the death penalty.

A number of other soldier were executed after they were tried and
convicted of raping and murdering local villagers. The full list of
people executed during the years of exile is attached to the submission.

After the Kabwe Conference, where the ANC's policy on the fair treatment
of state agents was reaffirmed and clarified, ANC president Oliver Tambo
decided to restructure the Security and Intelligence Department and bring
in new personnel. A new leadership was appointed in 1987.

The leadership set about correcting many of the problems which remained
within the department, and it actively and systematically investigated
conditions in the detention centres and proposed corrective measures
where problems remained.

The new leadership was also more rigorous in supervising the
interrogation practices, and where violations were detected, remedial
steps were immediately taken.

At the same time, the ANC's intelligence network had so advanced that it
was possible to get information from within security police structures
about some of their agents in our ranks. This made the work of the ANC
and MDM much easier; it reinforced the drive against undue pressure to
obtain information.

In so far as cases of abuse are concerned, the ANC concurs with the
findings of the Motsuenyane Commission that, although there were a number
of such excesses, it was never established that there was any systematic
policy of abuse.

Instead the report illustrates many consistent efforts by the leadership
to establish mechanisms of accountability and oversight. To the extent
that the Motsuenyane Commission found that some detainees were maltreated
and recommended that the ANC should apologise for this violation of their
human rights, the ANC does so without qualification.

5.5 ANC MEMBERS WHO DIED IN EXILE

Over the years, the ANC has sought meticulously to record deaths in
exile, irrespective of the causes. The rigours of underground existence
have not made this an easy task.

After the unbanning of the ANC in 1990, a fulltime Bereaved Parents
Committee was set up with the purpose of updating the list, making
contacts with the families to inform them of the fate of their relatives.

No single death can be celebrated, whatever the circumstances. A single
death is one too many; and the ANC would therefore wish to avoid
comparing the number of deaths, among those who were or had been in
exile, with the total number (amounting to tens of thousands) of those
who were in its ranks over three decades.

5.6 THE UDF, MDM AND EXCESSES OF MASS REVOLT

Many participants in the mass uprisings of the 1980s did not fall within
the formal structures and organisational discipline of the ANC, but
believed they were acting with the broad parameters outlined by the ANC.

The UDF and MDM never shifted from their policy of non-violent forms of
struggle.

However, given the situation in which they operated, it was impossible
for the UDF/MDM to actually control all activities carried out in its
name by people and groups who, while supporting the broad aims of these
organisations, were not directly linked to the leadership and discipline
of the organisations.

The use of extreme methods to neutralise the enemy, which included
deterring and punishing collaborators, was perceived by many as an
entirely justifiable act of self-defence. Such extreme methods, including
the 'necklace' method, were never the policy of the ANC or UDF/MDM.


6. CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE


6.1 THE ANC's OWN CONDUCT

The mass of the people led by the liberation movement waged a just
struggle against apartheid which was designated by the United Nations as
a crime against humanity.

This struggle was no different in broad principle from other
decolonisation struggles in other parts of the world.

However, we do acknowledge that the fact of a just struggle on its own
does not render us or anyone else immune from judgement on humane or
other conduct. We have set out the conditions under which any such
violations may have occurred. But we emphasise that none of such
violations arose out of official policy or were in any case sanctioned by
the leadership. There are instances where we could have acted more firmly
and speedily to prevent or stop abuses; and for that the ANC accepts
collective responsibility.

6.2 REPARATIONS AND RESTITUTION

An important role of the TRC is to ensure that justice prevails to the
maximum extent possible. Justice is not only punishment or retribution.

It must be appreciated that there needs to be restoration, restitution
and/or reparation within the framework of such resources that South
Africa can afford. Provision could be made for:

* monetary awards, either by way of lump sum or monthly pension;
* other forms of material assistance and support;
* psychological support and provision of comfort and solidarity;
* steps to be taken to restore the dignity and honour as well as the
  good names of victim
* steps to be taken to ensure that South Africa remembers.

The list is not exhaustive.

6.3 RECONCILIATION AND NATION-BUILDING

Human rights violations originated with the system of colonialism and
evolved over centuries. The doctrines of racial superiority, the pursuit
of narrow interests and privileges for the white minority in general and
Afrikaners in particular - all premised on the exclusion of the majority
- "naturally" had to be buttressed by a repressive regime.

The system of apartheid and its violent consequences were systematic;
they were deliberate; they were a matter of policy.

Therefore, the basic premise in correcting this historical injustice is
for South Africans to pay allegiance to, to consolidate and defend, the
democratic constitution and human rights culture that it espouses. It is
for all citizens to promote and utilise to maximum effect the rights that
we have attained, and ensure that open and accountable government becomes
a matter of course in our body politic. It is for us to promote equal
individual rights without regard to race, colour, religion, language and
other differences; and at the same time ensure that equal collective
rights pertaining to these issues are protected. And it is for us to work
together to build a better life for all.

Combined with the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, all
these efforts will afford us the confidence to say: Never Again! We
appreciate the fact that the Commission is pursuing its work without fear
or favour; and we hope that at the end of this process, South Africans
will be the wiser, and better able to march to the future with confidence
in one another and in their capacity to create a prosperous, peaceful and
just society in which any violation of human rights will be fading
memories of a past gone by, never to return.


===========================================================================



Preface


The African National Congress welcomes the establishment of the
Commission for Truth and Reconciliation (TRC) and commits itself to
assist in ensuring that the Commission realises its objectives.

The ANC campaigned actively for the TRC to be included in the Interim
Constitution because we believe that such a Commission can play an
important role in ensuring the psychological, intellectual and political
well-being of the new democracy. Only by unveiling and acknowledging as
far as possible the truth about the realities of one of the most odious
and vicious political systems in twentieth century world politics can the
millions whose basic human rights were legally trampled upon as a matter
of course be accorded the kind of respect which they deserve, and the
reparations which are possible. Only by confronting the past can there be
genuine reconciliation, nation-building and unity in our country.
Creating an official record of what happened could help in a cathartic
way to heal South Africans psychologically. By knowing what happened and
why it happened, South Africa will be better placed to ensure that the
evil deeds of the past are never repeated.

The law defines the parameters within which the TRC is to pursue its
investigations, hearings and recommendations. The ANC fully subscribes to
this legal process. Our presentation therefore aims to relate directly to
matters within the jurisdiction of the TRC, while at the same time
providing a context in which points made in the submission can be more
fully understood. In this sense therefore, this submission is neither a
definitive nor comprehensive history of the period under review; it is
rather a brief account addressing the specific issues relevant to the
mandate of the TRC.

The ANC intends to make further submissions to the Commission as the need
arises. ANC members will be forwarding amnesty applications to the
Amnesty Committee, which will provide detailed information on the
political objectives of relevant armed operations, the context in which
such operations took place, and the lines of command governing operatives
concerned.

The ANC respects the independence of the TRC and the integrity of the
Commissioners, and will strive to ensure that the public shares this
perspective. As an organisation, we commit ourselves to respect the final
rulings of the TRC, confident that the objective will be to promote
justice for all, as well as ensure socio-economic advancement,
particularly to communities which have been systematically and unfairly
disadvantaged in the past.

19th August, 1996


===========================================================================



2. Introduction


As part of the process of the transformation of our country, the ANC had
to consider its approach to the difficult but critically important
question of what the new South Africa should do with those among our
citizens who were involved in gross human rights violations during the
struggle for our emancipation.

The choices we had to make can be stated in a simple and straightforward
manner.

We could have decided to hold our own Nuremberg Trials.

We could have decided that all that should be done should be to forgive
everything that has happened in the past.

We, however reached the conclusion that neither of these would be the
correct decision to take.

In considering the correctness or otherwise of this conclusion, the point
needs to be borne in mind that we are in transition from an apartheid to
a democratic society.

This is not a single event but a protracted process.

What this speaks to is an unjust cause on one side and a just cause on
the other.

Inherent to the system of white minority domination in this and all other
countries where it occurred, was the philosophy and practice of the use
of force to ensure the perpetuation of the system.

Force and violence by the dominant against the dominated, the
contraposition of power to powerlessness, the attribution of mystical
possibilities of retribution to the governors who can visit their wrath
on the third and fourth generations of those who hate them, the
suspension of all social norms, to enable the state and servants of the
state to resort to the unbridled use of violence - all this, and more
besides, sustains the continuity of colonial rule.

To maintain its internal integrity, coherence and rationale, this system
could not but integrate in its world vision the concept of humans with a
right to govern and sub-humans privileged to be governed.

Among other things, this paradigm allows those who enjoy the right to
govern the ethical framework which permits them to use maximum force
against any sub-human who would dare question his or her duty to accept
the sacred obligation to respect the need to be governed.

The simultaneous and interdependent legitimisation of the two inherently
anti-human concepts of racial superiority and the colonial state as the
concentrated expression of the unlimited right to the use of force, of
necessity and according to the inherent logic of the system of apartheid,
produced the gross violations of human rights by the apartheid state
which are the subject of part of the work of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.

It was as a result of the correct understanding of the nature of the
system of apartheid that the United Nations characterised the system
itself, and not merely its logical results, as a Crime Against Humanity.

With regard to the narrower context within which the TRC is considering
this matter, the theoretical foundation of the enquiry would be the
matter we have referred to, the legitimisation of the use of force in
general but especially against those who would dare challenge the system.

This has two consequences.

One of these is the elevation of the state organs of repression above all
other state structures, their exemption from all norms of common law
consistent with limitations on the use of force, the conferring of powers
on individuals to mete out violence as they deem fit and the consequent
brutalisation of such individuals so that the perpetration of violence
becomes their second nature.

The second of these consequences is the demonising by the state of those
it seeks to destroy and against whom therefore, it permits the maximum
use of force.

This would cover both individuals and institutions or organisations. It
is necessitated by the need to encase the perpetrators of violence in the
psychological armour which enables them to be free of all restraint as
they carry out their deadly work.

During the period since the end of the wars of independence, the racist
state activated its capacity to use force in direct response to its
perception of the threat posed by the forces of resistance to the
survival of the system of white minority domination.

As the offensive for the destruction of this system, became more serious
and sustained so the features we have described above, increasingly
resorted to force and the demonising of the genuine opponents of the
system.These features increasingly came to the fore and assumed
precedence in state policy and practice.

In reality, it would not be difficult for the Commission to proceed from
the theoretical base indicated above to construct a picture of the
structures, systems and practices put in place by the apartheid regime to
confront the challenge it faced, some of whose results will be subject to
review as human rights violations and applications for amnesty.

This would put in their place and context issues such as:

* the doctrine of "total strategy",
* the National Security Management System and the recruitment of many
  South Africans form all walks of life as agents of this system of
  repression;
* the use of special forces as elite offensive counter insurgency
  forces;
* the formation of special murder squads such as the Vlakplaas Unit,
  the CCB, the Caprivi trainees;
* the birth of destabilisation units including vigilante groups such as
  the Witdoeke;
* the use of criminals to carry out assassinations and, in return,
  their protection which enabled them to continue with their "ordinary"
  criminal activities;
* the coercion or persuasion of all social institutions including
  business, the media and academic establishments and leading individuals
  within these, to serve the common cause of defending the established
  racist order;
* the conduct of "stratkom" operations to win hearts and minds to the
  cause of a pro-apartheid counter-insurgency campaigns, or to reach
  political objectives through the combination of covert violence and
  propaganda operations;
* the emergence of amoral ogres within our society who believed, among
  other things, that they were licensed to kill;
* the serious erosion of both private and public morality as a
  consequence of the spread and entrenchment of illegal activity by
  agents of the state, entailing the abdication of the fundamental
  responsibilities of the state: the protection of the legal system and a
  law-governed social order; and,
* on an even wider scale, the integration in the "strategic thinking"
  of the white minority regime of the use of the weapons of mass
  destruction - nuclear, chemical and biological - and the actual
  production of these weapons.

We raise all these matters because they are directly relevant to the
truth which the TRC is intended to discover and convey.

They are equally germane to the question of what will need to be done
both now and in the aftermath of the work of the TRC, to ensure that our
country and people are never again exposed to the threat of gross human
rights violations.

Counterpoised to what we have been discussing is, of course, the movement
for national liberation - the other antagonist in the conflict to which
the forces of white minority rule responded in the manner described above.

National liberation movements are about the emancipation of people. They
are formed to fight against oppression, for freedom. Where the oppressor
must necessarily fight for the state control of the individual, the
liberator struggles for the restoration of the democratic rights of the
individual and the sovereignty of the nation.

These movements necessarily depend on the voluntary support of the
population; they have no capacity to offer material rewards to their
activists. They must therefore depend on the moral superiority of their
cause, relying on this as the principal motive force which enables the
movement to withstand all attempts at its suppression.

Respect for human life and the pursuit of happiness and liberty are
fundamental to the philosophy and practice of any genuine national
liberation movement.

Any objective study would show that the ANC, has evinced all the
characteristics mentioned above, whatever the circumstances of the
struggle.

In this context, it is necessary to focus attention on certain salient
features which we believe are critical to the work of the TRC.

The first of these is that the ANC only decided to resort to organised
violence once the oppressor regime had blocked all avenues of legal
non-violent resistance.

The resort to violence was therefore a last rather than first resort,
precisely because the protection of life itself is integral to the world
view of the liberation movement and because the constituency of the
liberation movement is, by definition, unarmed, as opposed to its
opposition which, again by definition, is heavily armed.

The second of these considerations is that even when it used force, the
liberation movement sought to do this in a limited way, in order to
generate sufficient pressure on the oppressor regime and to create the
conditions which would make a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
country possible.

When the strategic objective of the movement was stated as " the armed
seizure of power by the people", the planning that took place to
accomplish this objective was focussed on directing attacks against the
repressive machinery of state, and not the civilian population which
constituted the political base of the apartheid ruling group.

The third important point to make is that in the elaboration of its
strategy, the liberation movement never sought to elevate the use of
force above all other forms of resistance, but viewed the armed struggle
as one of the "four pillars" of our global strategy.

Those four pillars were:

* the mobilising and organising of the masses of the people to engage
  in political struggle;
* the strengthening of the underground movement to ensure effective and
  continuous leadership of the democratic movement as a whole;
* the maintenance of the armed offensive to help tilt the balance in
  favour of the forces for democracy and non-racialism; and,
* the international isolation of apartheid South Africa, and the
  strengthening of international support for the South African democratic
  movement.

The result of this approach was that the armed struggle was never the
sole nor the most important element in the strategy of the ANC.

Two consequences follow from this approach which, again, are relevant to
the work of the TRC.

One of these is that the ANC always insisted on the primacy of politics
over the use of force and therefore never accepted the notion that "power
grows out of the barrel of a gun".

A result of this fundamental attitude was that the ANC took a principled
stand against the use of terrorism as an element in its armed struggle.

It was for this reason that the ANC avoided what would have been very
easy targets - namely, attacks on white civilians such as could have been
carried out at schools, churches, on civilian aircraft and diplomatic
missions, etc.

Another of these consequences is that the ANC trained all its combatants
as armed political activists and not as mere soldiers whose only
responsibility was to understand and carry out orders from a superior
command.

This was very importance because the actions of each combatant had to be
aimed at winning the support of the people, Combatants had to be able to
operate in circumstances in which they were cut off, not only from their
commanders but from the leadership of the movement in general, and in
which the circumstances in which they found themselves would change
rapidly, calling for prompt decision making.

Two other matters critical to the work of the TRC are, first, the concept
of a just war and the place of the struggle for national liberation in
international law, and secondly, the boundaries of acceptable conduct
within an irregular war - guerilla warfare.

Let us deal with the first of these.

The constitutional settlement expressed in the 1910 Act of Union resulted
in the formalisation of the definition of the African majority as the
colonised, with the colonial master being the state that would be
constituted by the combined Boer-British white population.

Great Britain granted independence to white colonists, while conceding
the right and the power to these colonialists to treat the indigenous
population as colonial subjects.

This resulted in the adoption of the phrase "colonialism of a special
type" to describe the political and socio-economic realities which
persisted until the formation of a democratically elected government in
1994.

During the course of this century, international law finally recognised
the right of nations to self-determination, up to and including
independence.

With this, came the acknowledgement of the right of any people denied the
right to self-determination to engage in struggle, including armed
rebellion, to gain that right.

This correct development constituted the legal recognition and
codification of a reality which had been established, among other such
outstanding historical events as the American and the Haitian Wars of
Independence.

The majority of the people of our country, oppressed as a colonised
people, had as equal a right to self-determination and the right to
engage in struggle to gain this right as did other colonised people.

We, like these other peoples, were therefore justified in engaging in a
just war.

This is the first and fundamental condition that must be acknowledged and
recognised in the context of any assessment of our armed struggle for
liberation, such as the TRC may have to make as it works to discharge its
mandate.

We have already stated the second element that bears on this issue - that
the ANC only opted to exercise its right to resort to a just war when the
apartheid regime closed all avenues to a peaceful resolution of the
injustice represented by colonialism of a special type.

The position stated in the Manifesto of Umkhonto we Sizwe published in
1961 was correct, that in these circumstances, we had no choice but to
submit or fight.

We chose to fight rather than submit and by submitting, contribute to the
perpetuation of the apartheid crime against humanity.

The oppressor regime will argue that the legally constituted South
African apartheid state enjoyed the rights that accrue to all states and
that rebellion against the established order had to be suppressed by all
legal means available to the state.

The issue however turns on the fundamental consideration that no
legitimacy can attach to a jurisprudence elaborated to enforce a crime
against humanity, as no notion of illegality can attach to the fact of
insurrection against a crime against humanity.

The naked reality is that our country would not be free today if we had
depended for our emancipation on legal parliamentary opposition,
including the white, tri-cameral and bantustan processes.

The second matter that requires consideration is, as we have said, the
concept of an irregular war.

In the period since the outbreak of the Second World War, there are many
examples of such wars with which the TRC could familiarise itself.

Any objective study of the military features of such wars would show
certain extraordinary circumstances which the TRC would need to
understand in order to order to deal with the expression of this
phenomenon in our own country.

We believe that it is important for the TRC to understand these
circumstances because, without such understanding, it would be impossible
for the Commission to properly consider the conduct of the campaign of
armed resistance to the system of apartheid.

In this context, there are four matters on which we will make detailed
presentations.

The first of these is that as a movement we made a determined and
sustained effort to ensure that we conducted an irregular war as far as
possible according to international conventions governing the
humanitarian conduct of warfare.

The second is that, nevertheless, cadres of the movement had to deal with
varied objective and subjective situations that were presented to them by
particular circumstances, without the possibility of abiding by
stipulated rules and norms.

If any resultant behaviour was inconsistent with these rules and norms,
at no stage could it ever be suggested that these cadres or the movement
as a whole had thereby fundamentally betrayed the humane character of the
movement for national liberation.

The third is that this movement had to protect itself from destruction
and defeat by a determined enemy that was prepared to use any means to
ensure the destruction and defeat of the movement for national liberation.

As a movement, we therefore had to take the necessary measures to defend
ourselves. Many of these defensive measures had to be carried out in
emergency conditions requiring a succession of immediate decisions,
without which the movement itself might be destroyed.

The fourth consideration is use of the enemy of "false flag" - operations
seemingly originating from within the movement, but, in reality, carried
out on the instructions of the enemy's security forces in order to
discredit the liberation movement.

In the end, the fundamental issue we would like to present to the TRC is
that as a liberation movement, we engaged in a just war for national
liberation.

The overwhelming majority of the actions carried out in the course of the
just war of national liberation do not constitute "gross violations of
human rights" as defined in the Act establishing and mandating the TRC.

Within this overall framework, there were particular actions carried out
by cadres and supporters of our movement which we believe fall within the
ambit of the work of the Commission, but must, nevertheless, be treated
within the context we have described above.

The political and operational leadership of the movement accepts
collective responsibility for all operations of its properly constituted
offensive structures, including operations described in the preceding
paragraph.

The ANC will therefore not be making any representation about those
activities in its conduct of the struggle for national liberation which
we deem to constitute legitimate actions carried out during a just and
irregular war for national liberation.

With regard to those operations which we believe fall within the ambit of
the work of the Commission, we will provide the Commission and the
country with the necessary information, while encouraging those members
and supporters of our movement where necessary to apply for amnesty.

In the context of what we have said above, it is necessary that we
consider three questions relevant to the work of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. These are:

* in what ways can the Commission, through its work, contribute to the
  achievement of the goal of national reconciliation?
* in what ways can it contribute to the realisation of the goal that
  our country and people should never again be exposed to the danger of
  institutionalised gross violation of human rights?
* what are the practical ways by which the concept of "reparation" can
  be realised? and,
* what is the place of the individual, in all these processes, be they
  perpetrator or victim?

National Reconciliation

The most important issue in this regard is that the grief of particular
individuals, important as it is to the affected individuals and the
nation, is relevant also to the extent that it contributes to the
achievement of the larger goal of national reconciliation.

National reconciliation will only have meaning if it addresses the
historic conflict in our country between black and white.

Through centuries of this conflict, the names of the players have changed
continuously, regardless of their colour and the causes they served.

What never changed was the character of the conflict, which was between
the white colonising forces and a black liberation movement, based on a
social system which elevated the white at the expense of the black.

National reconciliation has to be between black and white.

Without transformation to end the disparities of privilege and
deprivation which are the legacy we have inherited from our colonial and
apartheid past, but which continue to define the present, national
reconciliation is impossible.

Whichever way the TRC interprets its mandate, it cannot avoid the
conclusion that the ghost that needs to be laid to rest is - the ending
of the domination of the black by the white, in all spheres of social
existence.

If our society does not achieve this, racial conflict will continue. The
goal of national reconciliation will not be achieved.

Clearly, this objective cannot be achieved by the TRC alone.

It also emphasises the obligation that rests on the Commission to make
its own recommendations as to what the larger and varied society from
which it is drawn might do, to contribute to the realisation of the goal
of national reconciliation.

Protection from Gross Violations of Human rights

Systematic violations of human rights are a manifestation of a social
system, rather than the exceptional faults of particular individuals.

To ensure that our country and people are never again exposed to such
systematic violations of human rights as occurred under apartheid, it is
necessary that we construct a constitutional, political and
socio-economic order which inherently protects human rights, and has the
means to defend itself against any tendency to limit or violate those
rights.

The mandate for the construction of such a system of course rests with
bodies other than the TRC. As a movement we are convinced that these
institutions are carrying out their mandate .

But we also believe that the TRC has an important role to play in helping
to ensure that the specialised institutions established by the apartheid
regime to carry out a campaign of repression are completely dismantled.

We refer here not to normal state organs such as the police, the Defence
Force and the intelligence services, but to other clandestine structures
established under the National Security Management System, some of which
continued to operate as part of the "third force".

The exposure and destruction of these structures is important to ensure
that they are stopped from actually or potentially engaging in any acts
of destabilisation.

This is particularly important in light of the fact that persons who
belong to these structures have been trained and motivated as
anti-democratic operatives and, in many instances, will not have changed
their ideological colours.

It is also important that the nation as a whole should be familiar with
this machinery as part of the process of raising the level of national
vigilance so that it is difficult for any government in future to create
similar structures for use against the people of our country.

Reparations

A crime against humanity, it is inevitable that the apartheid system will
have had a detrimental effect on all black people in our country.

In this sense, all the oppressed people could correctly assert that they
are entitled to reparation for harm caused to them by the apartheid
system.

To come more narrowly to the issue of reparations as it relates to the
TRC, it is important to bear in mind that millions of people were
involved in the struggle for national liberation, whatever the particular
form of their engagement.

To defeat this struggle, the apartheid regime carried out a widespread
campaign of terror which affected hundreds of thousands of people to one
degree or another.

What these masses sought by their engagement in struggle was not personal
reward but the emancipation or our country.

Their greatest reward is the victory of the democratic cause and the
reconstruction and development of the country in a manner that radically
improves the quality of life of the people in as speedy a manner as
possible.

The TRC will therefore have to look for ways and means in which to extend
reparations to the people as a whole. A lot of creative thinking will
have to go into this so that steps are taken which will inspire the
people to accept that such reparation as is due is made.

Where reparations are made to individuals, whatever the form of such
reparation, the point will have to be taken into account that the numbers
of people entitled to such reparation are larger than anyone of us can
imagine.

As the principles of equity will have to be observed in awarding these
reparations, care should be taken that the new society does not assume
obligations it cannot meet.

The Role of the Individual

Many individuals have appeared and will appear before the TRC both to
apply for amnesty and to tell the truth about violations of human rights,
as perpetrators and victims.

However we should bear in mind that any process which visualises all
individual victims of the gross violation of human rights appearing
before the Commission would have to take into account that this would
require that the TRC sit for many years.

Consideration should therefore be given to how the hundreds of thousands
or millions of affected individuals and families might be recognised, and
how to draw the necessary lessons and examples from a wide variety of
individual experiences, without it being necessary that everyone appears
before the Commission.

We should not lose sight of the fact that one of the central objectives
of the TRC is the achievement of national reconciliation.

An element of this is described as personal catharsis, and this should
reinforce the achievement of the broader national goal which relates to
the building of a democratic, peaceful and non-racial South Africa.

It is also important that, within its lifetime, the Commission should
complete the amnesty process, to ensure that the democratic state is not
left with the responsibility of instituting criminal investigations and
the possible prosecution of people for actions that took place during the
period covered in the mandate of the TRC.

If this were to happen to any significant degree, it would mean that the
TRC had failed in its mission and had, by that failure, condemned our
country to continuing conflict about events of the past rather than the
reconciliation sought from the work of the TRC.

The ANC is ready to assist in the gathering of such information from
individuals and families as might be relevant to the work of the TRC. We
would do this to help ensure that the TRC process is as inclusive as
possible.

At the same time we believe that it is important that the individual
presentations should assist in dealing with the fundamental question of
conflict among organised forces and between social systems, which is what
the TRC must address if it is to discharge its responsibility to the
nation.

Conclusion

The ANC is committed to doing everything in its power to help the TRC and
the nation to know as much as is possible about the events of the period
the TRC is mandated to investigate.

We believe that the TRC should conclude its work as quickly as possible
so that we do indeed let bygones be bygones and allow the nation to
forgive a past it nevertheless dare not forget.


===========================================================================



3. The Historical and International Context


The approach of this submission is to identify the broad contours of
gross violations of human rights during the apartheid era, with a
particular focus on the period 1960 to 1993. Within this context, the
concomitant responses of the ANC as the leading force in the struggle for
democracy, freedom and human rights in South Africa will be explained.
The forms of struggle embarked upon by the ANC were in response to the
policies, laws and activities of the apartheid regime and at the same had
an impact on them. In the final analysis, the reaction of a people to
their subjugation will take forms dictated to by the conditions of that
subjugation

The thirty years beginning with the Sharpeville shootings in March 1960
(followed by the banning of the ANC and other organisations and the State
of Emergency) up to the first democratic elections in April 1994,
constitute an identifiable historical period. It was during these three
decades that apartheid policies were most expansively and aggressively
pursued; that the South African state made a decisive shift towards more
overtly authoritarian forms of social control and political repression;
and that massive transgressions of basic human rights in South Africa
became commonplace, bringing international notoriety to apartheid South
Africa.


3.1 Colonialism, dispossession and segregation


It is necessary to emphasise that formal apartheid was preceded by a
sustained period of dispossession, denial and subordination. The process
of colonial conquest in South Africa lasted for over two centuries; from
the destruction of Khoisan communities in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, through the bloody century of warfare in the present day
Eastern Cape Province, to the military defeats further north in the late
nineteenth century. A further crushing assertion of imperial might
occurred in 1899-1902 with the subjugation of the Boer republics by
British armies.

Modern South Africa was built on the foundations of conquered
territories, captive peoples, scorched earth and shattered sovereignties.
The "colour bar constitution" of 1910, which brought the Union of South
Africa into existence, affirmed white interests at the expense of the
black majority. It not only took away some of the rights enjoyed by black
voters in the Cape, but also denied any political rights to black people
in the other colonies, thus establishing the framework for all-pervasive
discrimination and conflict in later years. Government legislated a
distinctive form of industrialisation based upon the cheap labour of a
disenfranchised majority. Segregation policies divided access to housing,
jobs, education and welfare along racial lines.

The 1948 white election saw the accession to power of the National Party.
The apartheid policies of the new regime codified, intensified and
extended existing disparities between "racial groups" within the South
African population. [Further details appear in Section 4.1 below.]

Between 1948 and 1960 curbs upon freedom of movement and on where people
might live and work were sharply intensified; racial classification
provided the basis for the provision of separate facilities in almost
every walk of life; the permissible forms of political behaviour were
narrowed. Many political and trade union leaders were banned and/or
banished to remote areas under terms of the Suppression of Communism Act
of 1950, which denied them recourse to the courts. The arrest of 156
leaders of the Congress Alliance and the protracted Treason Trial was a
further instance of the attempts by the state to outlaw the legitimate
political demands of the disenfranchised majority.

But when one compares the 1950s with what followed, it is clear that in
the 1960s there was a qualitative shift towards more repressive policies
and practices by the National Party government. In the political arena,
these policies and practices significantly intensified violations of
basic human rights, abrogating the rule of law, criminalising a wide
range of political activities, and vastly increasing the coercive powers
of the state. At the same time, the overall administration of apartheid
became increasingly disruptive of people's lives and more devastating in
its effects. [For details see sections 4.1 to 4.3 below.]

The specificity of the 1960s is important, for it was also in this decade
that the African National Congress was proscribed by the government and
consequently turned to underground forms of organisation, and adopted the
armed struggle. This response by the ANC is dealt with more fully in
Section 5.1 below. For the moment, it is useful to view the early history
of the ANC within the context of the South Africa sketched above.


3.2 The history of the African National Congress to 1960


Founded in 1912, the ANC is the oldest national political organisation in
South Africa. From the start the ANC's core principles were to promote
unity, counter racism and work towards equal rights for all South
Africans.

Its formation was a direct response to the 1910 Act of Union which
excluded black South Africans from citizenship rights, and
constitutionally entrenched minority rule. At the time one of the early
activists warned with great foresight:

"Equal Rights ... is the motto that will yet float at the masthead of the
new ship of state which has been launched under the Union, and no other
will be permanently substituted while there is one black or coloured man
of any consequence or self-respect in the country, or any white man who
respects the traditions of free government - so help us God."
Izwi Labantu, 16/02/1909; quoted in A. Odendaal, Vukani Bantu! The
Beginnings of Black Protest Politics in South Africa to 1910 (David
Phillip, Cape Town, 1984)

To protect the interests of the disenfranchised in the new South Africa
of that time, the ANC formed itself as a "Native Parliament". It
consistently tried to promote the interests of Africans to oppose "by
just means" the colour bar, and to call for "equitable representation" in
Parliament and the extension of political and civil rights regardless of
race. In a real sense its formation sowed the seeds which reached
fruition with the creation of a united South African nation in 1994.

In the early decades of its existence, the ANC was conspicuously
committed to act within the law; its methods strictly constitutional -
petitions, legal suits, and deputations - even though its representations
consistently fell on deaf ears.

Influenced by the international struggle against fascism, the growth of
anti-colonial movements in other countries, the formation of the United
Nations Organisation and both the intransigence of those in power in
South Africa and a growing mood of resistance amongst the black majority,
the ANC became more assertive in its demands from the Second World War
onwards. The ANC's historic Africans' Claims document of 1943 underlined
support for the Atlantic Charter adopted by the Allies as a guide to the
creation of a new post-war world order and included a Bill of Rights for
South Africa which would ensure full citizenship rights for all - the
first such document in our country's history.

In 1949 the ANC adopted a Programme of Action which sought to realise the
above objectives, using new methods of direct action such as boycotts,
strikes and civil disobedience if necessary. In the Defiance Campaign of
1952 over 8,000 people were arrested for the deliberate contravention of
apartheid laws. The Defiance Campaign won mass popular support for the
movement and was followed by other protest campaigns in the 1950s -
against Bantu Education, against the introduction of passes for women,
against farm labour conditions, and against the destruction of Sophiatown.

The militancy that started to take root in this decade, was essentially
in response to intensified oppression and repression introduced by the NP
government. Instructively, the decade opened with the killing by police
of 18 Africans on 1 May 1950. This trend was to continue, culminating in
the 1960 Sharpeville massacre.

It is appropriate at this juncture to refer to an observation by former
ANC President Oliver Tambo in 1983, which captures not only the essence
of this period, but also brings out in bold relief the paradigm of
debates in later years and even today:

"The ANC was non-violent for a whole decade in the face of violence
against African civilians...No one refers to Africans as civilians and
they have been victims of shootings all the time. Even children - they
have been killed in the hundreds. Yet the word has not been used in all
these years....But implicit in the practice of the South African regime
is that when you shoot an African, you are not killing a civilian".

In 1955, the ANC and its allies convened the Congress of the People,
which adopted the Freedom Charter - a powerful call for equal political
and civil rights, as well as basic economic and social welfare
provisions. Once again the ANC was the first to outline a clear
alternative programme, based on non-racialism and universally accepted
human rights principles, in opposition to the short-sighted and
discriminatory policies of the National Party government.

Despite the new militancy of the 1950s, the ANC remained committed to
non-violent, legal forms of struggle. Its dedication to political reform
by persuasion rather than by violent means was most memorably, stated by
Chief Albert Luthuli in 1952:

"In so far as gaining citizenship rights and opportunities for the
unfettered development of the African people, who will deny that thirty
years of my life have been spent knocking in vain, patiently and modestly
at a closed and barred door?"

Five years later, when he wrote to Prime Minister Strijdom, urging the
calling of "a multi-racial convention to seek a solution to our pressing
national problems", he reiterated that the ANC

"has always sought to achieve its objectives by using non-violent
methods. In its most militant activities it has never used nor attempted
to use physical force. It has used non-violent means and ways recognised
as legitimate in the civilised world, especially in the case of a people,
such as we are, who find themselves denied all effective constitutional
means of voicing themselves".

If it is to be properly understood, the pattern of South African politics
between 1960 and 1993, including the massive violations of human rights
by the apartheid regime and the forms of struggle adopted by the
liberation movement, need to be located within this historical context.


3.3 Just struggle in the international context


"Those who make peaceful change impossible make violent change
inevitable."
- John F. Kennedy.

The African National Congress was internationally recognised as a
liberation movement. It was accorded observer status by most
international organisations including the United Nations, the
Organisation of African Unity and the Non-Aligned Movement.

The traditional legal view of wars of national liberation was that they
constitute a category of internal wars and as such are not subject to
international legal regulation. However, from the early 1960s in a number
of international legal fora, but more significantly in the United Nations
General Assembly, a growing majority supported the view that struggles
against colonialism and other forms of oppression in pursuance of the
right to self-determination had an international character. The point of
departure for most ex-colonial states in the UN was their recognition
that this principle imposed an obligation on the colonising power, and
established the right of all peoples to the exercise of
self-determination. This trend culminated in General Assembly Resolution
1514(XV) of 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. However, the most
important achievement in this respect is the Declaration on Principles of
International Law Concerning Friendly Relations, adopted by the General
Assembly Resolution 2625 (XXV) in 1970. This Declaration which was
adopted in the General Assembly by acclamation, i.e. unanimously without
a dissenting vote, gave universal recognition to the legal and binding
nature of the principle of self-determination.

In view of these developments, wars of national liberation could no
longer be considered as internal wars since they were now regulated by
international law. As concerns the legality of the use of force in the
context of self-determination, the Declaration provides that:

"Every State has the duty to refrain from any forcible action which
deprives people... of their right to self-determination, freedom and
independence. In their actions against, and resistance to, such forcible
action in pursuit of the exercise of their right to self-determination,
such people are entitled to seek and receive support in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter."

This provision had significant implications for cases of armed resistance.

Firstly, it clearly stated that the "forcible action" or use of force
which is prohibited is that emanating from a government in denial of the
right to self-determination.

Secondly, armed resistance to forcible denial of self-determination - by
imposing or maintaining alien domination by force - is legitimate
according to the Declaration. In other words, liberation movements have
the right to go to war under the Charter.

Thirdly, the right of these movements to seek and receive support and
assistance necessarily implies that they have a locus standi in
international law and that third states can assist or even recognise them
without this act constituting an intervention in the domestic affairs of
the oppressor state.

Although South Africa was considered an independent state and not a
colonial power in the strict sense of the word, it was argued and
accepted in the United Nations that the self-determination of the South
African people had not taken place because of their subjection to
legalised racial discrimination by the government through the internal
policy of apartheid. The ANC, frustrated in its efforts to achieve
democracy peacefully, legitimately took up arms against the apartheid
government.

Thus, it would be morally wrong and legally incorrect, for instance, to
equate apartheid with the resistance against it. While the latter was
rooted in the principles of human dignity and human rights, the former
was an affront to humanity itself.

No issue before the United Nations has been more enduring than the
discriminatory treatment officially accorded to black people in South
Africa; in 1972 the Special Political Committee of the General Assembly
devoted no fewer than 19 of its total 51 meetings to discussing
apartheid. Between 1946-1948, the General Assembly passed no fewer than
215 resolutions dealing principally or exclusively with South Africa.

In 1965 the General Assembly also adopted the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. It declared that
the doctrine of superiority based on racial discrimination was morally
condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous. In the following year the
Assembly took an additional step in its campaign against apartheid, when
it affirmed

"its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of the people of South
Africa for human rights and fundamental freedoms irrespective of race,
colour or creed."

At its twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sessions the General Assembly
adopted a series of Resolutions dealing with apartheid. Most important
among the Resolutions was Resolution 2671 of 1970. Apart from declaring
that the policies of apartheid were a negation of the Charter of the
United Nations and constituted a crime against humanity, this resolution
reaffirmed recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of the people of
South Africa to eliminate, by all the means at their disposal, apartheid
and racial discrimination and to attain majority rule in the county as a
whole, based on universal suffrage.

In 1973, the UN adopted the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, which also called on State
Parties to adopt legislative, judicial and administrative measures to
prosecute, bring to trial and punish persons responsible for the crime of
apartheid.

As early as 1972 General Assembly Resolution 2852(XXV) on Respect for
Human Rights in Armed Conflicts had reaffirmed that:

"Persons participating in resistance movements and freedom fighters in
Southern Africa and in territories under colonial and alien domination
and foreign occupation who are struggling for their liberation and
self-determination should, in case of arrest, be treated as prisoners of
war in accordance with the principles of the Hague Conventions of 1907
and the Geneva Conventions of 1949."

This was subsequently formalised by Protocol I of 1977 to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 which applied the totality of the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 to wars of national liberation, which was signed by the ANC in
1980. The implication of this was that members of the liberation
movements were protected from South African criminal law except where
their activities could be characterised as war crimes or crimes against
humanity such as genocide. The South African government consistently
refused to ratify this Protocol. [Refer to Section 3.5 on the
international status of the apartheid regime .]


3.4 Apartheid and human rights


Apartheid was founded on, and represented an intensification of, the
colonial system of subjugation of Africans, Coloureds and Indians. The
leadership of the National Party based their principles and programmes on
doctrines of racial superiority, some of them derived from Nazism, an
ideology with which they had identified through the Ossewa Brandwag and
other activities during the Second World War. From the crop of OB leaders
and operatives emerged political leaders, judges and other exalted
persons of the apartheid era. The statement by former Prime Minister BJ
Vorster that what in Germany was National Socialism was known as
Christian Nationalism in South Africa, succinctly captures the NP's
admiration of Nazism.

At the root of their doctrine was the single-minded pursuit of Afrikaner
ethnic and white racial dominance, which placed these groups' rights and
privileges above everything else. As such, individual interests and
rights, let alone those of black people, were to be subsumed under this
group mission. The constitutional order was adjusted and readjusted over
the decades to pursue this objective: and even today, pursuit of
exclusive group interests as pitted against the individual rights of all
citizens, constitutes one of the real tensions in the country's body
politic.

To entrench and defend such Afrikaner dominance, the NP set about
transforming the judiciary, the army, the police, intelligence services,
academia, the civil service, the mass media, economic and labour
relations and parastatals. A web of secret organisations, primary among
which was the all-male, all-Afrikaner Broederbond, was used to maintain a
firm grip on the levers of political and economic power.

Apartheid oppression and repression was therefore not an aberration of a
well-intentioned undertaking that went horribly wrong. Neither was it, as
we were later told, an attempt to stave off the "evil of communism". Its
ideological underpinning and the programmes set in motion constituted a
deliberate and systematic mission of a ruling clique that saw itself as
the champion of a "super-race".

In order to maintain and reproduce a political and social order which is
premised upon large-scale denial of human rights, far-reaching and
vicious criminal, security and penal codes were necessary. Those who
sought to defend the system increasingly relied upon intimidation,
coercion and violence to curb and eliminate the opposition that apartheid
inevitably engendered. The spectrum of intimidation, coercion and
violence is one with which the Truth and Reconciliation Commission is
becoming familiar in all its gradations.

At the legal end of the spectrum are Acts of Parliament which defined
large areas of political activism as sabotage and terrorism; placed the
onus of proof on the accused; made offences retrospective; imposed harsh
minimum sentences; equipped the police with sweeping powers and
simultaneously subverted an already compromised judicial system. From
there, the spectrum extends through psychological and physical abuse of
detainees, including torture and death, the extra-legal harassment of
individuals whose activities remained legal even within the context of
the security laws, the sordid repertoire of "dirty tricks" conducted by
statutory and clandestine organs of state, and ultimately to kidnappings,
bombings, massacres and murders by hit-squads and "third force" agencies.
An attempt will be made below to more systematically detail the
repressive framework created under apartheid, and show how this changed
in response to changing circumstances during the period under review.


3.5 Apartheid violations of human rights in an international context


The apartheid regime persistently tried to hide behind the idea that what
it did to its population was simply a matter of domestic concern, and not
the business of the international community. When this failed, the regime
adopted a new approach, arguing that the legal and moral basis for
international action did not exist and that the description of the
apartheid regime as a pariah, an outcast, or an international outlaw was
simply the result of a mischievous and malicious campaign by the Third
World and its Communist allies.

In particular, the international community recognised that the workings
of apartheid - killings, torture, mass removals, violation of basic
rights such as freedom of movement, racial discrimination etc.- did not
constitute a mere wrong but a crime against humanity, first identified at
the Nuremberg Trials and subsequently applied to the apartheid structure
under numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, forming part of the practice under international law which is
one element of the development of international rules.

Although the apartheid regime was in de facto control of South Africa, it
acted without a proper mandate. The defective or illegitimate status of
the South Africa regime did not mean, however, that the regime was not
accountable in international law for its violent and racist policies, for
as the international Court has said:

"Physical control of territory, and not sovereignty or legitimacy is the
basis of State liability affecting other States."

The role of the Security Council in taking decisions binding on the
international community was vital, in a legal sense. Since 1962, by
increasing majorities, the General Assembly urged states to impose
sanctions of various kinds and, since 1965, comprehensive sanctions. The
Security Council, through the persistent use of the veto by certain
permanent members, thwarted the opinion of the international community
that any form of collaboration was, not only morally wrong because it
provided aid and succour to apartheid, but was also contrary to the basic
rules of international law .

Notwithstanding this, the Security Council unanimously passed resolution
556 in 1984, which encapsulated the legal and political basis for the
illegitimacy of the apartheid regime. This resolution reiterated its
condemnation of apartheid policy as a crime against humanity; demanded
the dismantling of the bantustans, and demanded the immediate eradication
of apartheid and the taking of the necessary steps towards the full
exercise of the right to self-determination in an unfragmented South
Africa.

In 1974 the General Assembly refused to accept the credentials of the
South African delegation, in effect barring South Africa from
participating in its work. No other state had faced this humiliation,
including expulsion or suspension from nearly every inter-governmental
and non-governmental international organisation. The reason for such
disengagement from normal relations turned on the nature of the regime.

For not only was apartheid an egregious form of gross, flagrant and
systematic violation of human rights, it also deprived the majority of
the right to self-determination.

An examination of relevant international conventions, declarations,
resolutions, judicial decisions and the practice of the United Nations
and its organs, and the practice of regional organisations and states,
yields affirmation of the following propositions of international law in
relation to the apartheid regime:

* Gross and systematic violation of the provision of the Universal
  Declaration of Human Rights of 1948, especially those provisions which
  must now be regarded as part of customary international law;
* Control of the black population and their treatment resulted in
  policies akin to slavery, contrary to a peremptory norm of
  international law recognised by the World Court in the Barcelona
  Traction Co. case (1970);
* Apartheid often produced outcomes similar to those of genocide - a
  practice now proscribed by the international community, leading to
  criminal sanctions;
* The policies of apartheid were a negation of the United Nations
  Charter and a crime against humanity, thereby giving universal
  jurisdiction for its suppression and punishment, on general principles
  and by treaty;
* The policies and actions of the apartheid regime constituted a
  serious obstacle to the exercise of the right to self-determination by
  the oppressed people of South Africa; and the forcible denial of
  self-determination violated the Charter of the UN and constituted a
  crime against peace;
* The South African regime had no right to represent the people of
  South Africa; its illegitimacy arose from the systematic breaches of
  peremptory rule of international law.

International law was part of the armoury of opposition to apartheid. It
validated activities and actions against apartheid and distinguished the
correctness of the actions of resistance from the illegality of the
regime.

While the ANC from its inception in 1912 articulated human rights for all
South Africans in line with internationally accepted democratic norms,
the trend on the part of white minority governments was towards a
restriction of human rights.

Moreover, unlike the racist state, the ANC took special care after being
compelled to take up arms in the 1960s to ensure that its conduct was in
compliance with international conventions in situations of armed
conflict. It argued, and this was widely accepted internationally, that
the struggle against apartheid and white minority rule was comparable to
other international struggles against tyranny, for example, the American
War of Independence, the war against Nazism, and the numerous
anti-colonial struggles in the 20th century.

International precedents support the notion that no equivalence can be
made between the defensive violence of the disenfranchised majority and
the institutional and overt or covert violence perpetrated in the name of
apartheid; in everyday parlance, the violence of a victim fighting back
cannot be equated with the malevolent aggression of the rapist.


===========================================================================



4. The National Party, Apartheid and the Anatomy of Repression in South
Africa, 1948-1994


Apartheid was premised on discrimination, denial and segregation in every
area of South African life - social, political and economic. It grossly
violated human rights in numerous ways, and on different levels. As time
passed the system of human rights violations mutated into different
forms, while retaining its essentially discriminatory and violent
features. Below we try to highlight laws, policies, actions and the
changing nature of apartheid, and show how these contributed to the gross
violation of human rights during the period under review by the
Commission.


4.1 The post-1948 legislative programme of apartheid


What the National Party did after 1948 was to make colonial segregation
and discrimination more systematic, and more far-reaching, and more
rigorously implemented and policed.

Thus the early years of National Party rule saw the passage of bedrock
segregationist and discriminatory laws, including:

* The Population Registration Act (1950) which allocated all South
  Africans to a particular racial group, from which flowed differential
  privileges and prohibitions;
* The Group Areas Act (1950 and subsequent amendments) which gave the
  government power to proclaim residential and business areas for the
  sole use of particular race groups, which, together with forced
  removals constituted one of the most blatant violations of the property
  rights of black people since the early years of colonial domination;
* The Separate Amenities Act (1953) which wrote into law the principle
  that members of different races might not enjoy the same public
  amenities;
* The Bantu Education Act (1953) which redefined the content and
  purpose of African schooling and vested its direct control in the
  Department of Native (later Bantu) Affairs; as well as laws on Coloured
  and Indian education and on tertiary institutions.

Other early apartheid legislation introduced sharp new curbs over the
urban residential rights and rights as urban workers of the African
population:

* The Native Labour (Settlement of Disputes) Act (1953) excluded
  African workers from the formal system of industrial relations;
* The Native Laws Amendment Act (1952) and Natives (Urban Areas)
  Amendment Act (1955) tightened the terms under which African men and
  women might legally live in urban areas;
* The Native Building Workers Act (1951) and Industrial Conciliation
  Act (1956) extended the operation of job colour bars, and passes to
  women.
* A further set of laws passed by the new National Party government
  sought to restrict legally permissible forms of political behaviour and
  protest:
* The Suppression of Communism Act (1950) not only proscribed the
  Communist Party of South Africa but created a series of offences under
  an extremely broad and vague definition of "communism";
* The Criminal Law Amendment Act (1953) - a response to the 1952
  Defiance Campaign - made it a criminal offence subject to heavy
  penalties to break any regulation "by way of protest, or in support of
  any campaign against any law";
* The Public Safety Act (1953) which gave the Minister of Justice the
  power to declare a state of emergency during which the ordinary law of
  the country would be suspended;
* The Criminal Procedures Act (1955) which, among others, allowed the
  state to designate the location of trials anywhere in the country
  irrespective of the area of abode of the accused, and gave
  Attorneys-General the right to prevent the granting of bail.
* The Prohibition of Interdicts Act (1956) which denied Africans the
  right to lodge interdicts and stop actions that may cause harm.

These are just a few examples of the hundreds of laws that were put on
the statute book to control the lives of black South Africans from the
cradle to the grave. All these unjust laws also made it impossible to use
the courts for redress against violations of human rights. Not
infrequently, the whites-only parliament speedily passed amendments and
new legislation to close legal loopholes, which further undermined human
rights. This combination of social and repressive laws fitted the overall
political and economic objectives of the apartheid government - taken
together they reflected, cold deliberate, planning and calculation.


4.2 The repressive apartheid security state, 1960-1974


Yet, drastic as was the legislation of the 1950s, it is abundantly clear
that in the 1960s the government became even more ruthlessly
authoritarian. A battery of new laws were passed, transgressions of human
rights became more blatant, and efforts at social engineering intensified
dramatically, causing considerable social dislocation.

Central to the new authoritarianism were sweeping restrictions on
political activity; increased the powers of the police, and further
subversion of the independence of the courts; and sweeping provisions for
detention without trial, creating conditions in which the use of torture
during interrogation became widespread. Central to this shift was a
barrage of security legislation, including:

* The Unlawful Organisations Act (1960) in the terms of which the ANC
  and PAC were declared unlawful in April 1960;
* The General Laws Amendment Act (1962, 1963, 1965) including the
  "Sabotage Act" which defined sabotage breathtakingly widely, so as to
  include tampering with property and the illegal possession of weapons
  and granted police the authority to detain people without charge and in
  solitary confinement for single or successive periods of 12 days
  (1962), 90 days (1963), or 180 days (1965);
* The Terrorism Act (1967) introduced the concept of indefinite
  detention without trial and provided startlingly broad definitions of
  "terrorism";
* The Internal Security Act (1972, amended in 1976) consolidated the
  legislation detailed above, retained the major "offences", provided for
  indefinite "preventive detention", and further restricted the
  jurisdiction of the courts.

The pattern of this security legislation is clear. It curtailed the
sphere of legitimate political opposition by enlarging the definition of
"criminal" offences, which was in some instances applied retrospectively,
and presumed the accused guilty until proven innocent. It expanded the
powers of police and jailers. It violated the normal tenets of the rule
of law by its widespread abrogation of individual rights and denial of
due process. The security legislation increased the coercive powers of
the state in the maintenance of what was a fundamentally unjust social
and political order.

More than this: in permitting detention without trial and solitary
confinement for indefinite periods, the security laws drew new zones of
penal licence which rapidly became blurred. From its inception during the
early 1960s, security legislation and its implementation have generated
widespread allegations of physical and mental abuse of people held in
detention. Individual officers abused their powers of interrogation;
interrogation became torture; torture became routine. The methods of
torture, both physical and psychological, were honed to a fine art - not
as an aberration by a few sadistic individuals, but as a result of
training and indoctrination of police officers, both inside the country
and with the help of apartheid allies such as the colonial fascists in
Mozambique and Angola, and the colonial administration in Algeria and
elsewhere. Certain police officers who were torturers in the 1960s later
rose to senior positions in the force, indicative of the degree of
legitimacy accorded by the apartheid regime to this behaviour.

Survivors of torture continue to suffer for many years afterwards: as one
victim put it recently,

"Twenty-six years have passed since I was among a group of seven women
subjected to torture by mind breaking by the apartheid security police,
and yet I often find myself back in the dungeon of solitary confinement
ready to take (my) own life for no explicable reason. This all happens
without any conscious thought on my part. I hate it when my mind brings
those terrifying memories - but my mind just does it for me, it was
orchestrated to destroy me..."

Many women detainees suffered sexual abuse and even rape at the hands of
their captors.

A grim mountain of depositions and court evidence stands as record to
abuses suffered by generations of detainees: at its apex are over sixty
deaths - from Ngudle and Saloojee, to Timol, Haron, Biko, Aggett, Malatji
and all the others.

The torment of prisoners and detainees did not end there: their families
and friends were also frequently subjected to sustained harassment,
surveillance, and mental torment which in some cases proved too much:
there have been many tragic cases of spouses and relatives of prisoners
breaking under this kind of pressure. Children of women detainees and
prisoners in particular often suffered most: while some swelled the ranks
of the liberation movement, others were thrown onto the streets to fend
for themselves.

At the same time, the courts were obliged by means of law and other
pressures to impose heavy sentences - at times on false allegations, as
in the case of Vuyisile Mini, Wilson Khayingo and Zinakile Mkhaba, who
were members of the Eastern Cape Regional Command of MK. They were hanged
after being found guilty of sabotage and the murder of a member of MK who
had turned state witness. Subsequently three other men - one of whom was
found guilty of the actual execution - were also condemned to death for
this murder.


4.3 The institutional violence and social consequences of apartheid


While the Truth and Reconciliation Commission is tasked with identifying
the harshest violations of human rights during the apartheid years, it
cannot remove the specific cases it will be dealing with from this
broader context where the dispossessed and disenfranchised masses faced
violence, discrimination and the violation of their human rights on a
daily basis during the colonial and apartheid eras. As the ANC argued in
1969:

"South Africa was conquered by force and is today ruled by force ... When
the gun is not in use, legal and administrative terror, fear, social and
economic pressure, complacency and confusion generated by propaganda and
"education" are the devices brought into play. (...) Behind these devices
hovers force. Whether in reserve or in actual employment, force is ever
present and this has been so since the white man came to Africa."

During the 1960s, concurrent with the creation of the new "security
state" and new legislation, the apartheid rulers embarked on radical new
forms of social engineering designed to defend and entrench white
minority rule, which had far-reaching consequences. A social order
already distinctive for deep-seated, legalised inequalities premised upon
racial classification now experienced new levels of what has been
characterised in authoritarian societies as "bureaucratic terrorism". In
essence, bureaucratic terror in South Africa involved the use of state
power against individuals and groups who are already economically
subordinate, socially discriminated against, and politically without
rights. Instances of the phenomenon included:

* huge numbers of arrests (in the 1960s hundreds of thousands annually)
  for contravention of pass laws;
* large-scale forced removals and resettlements, mainly to the
  Bantustans;
* the clearance of so-called "black spots" (pockets of land held in
  freehold by African farming communities);
* the endorsing out of urban areas of so-called "surplus people";
* the redefinition of all Africans as "citizens" of ethnic homelands or
  Bantustans.

The implementation of basic apartheid measures (such as pass laws, influx
control, urban areas restrictions, job reservation, separate amenities,
and so on) meant that basic "first generation" human rights - such as the
franchise, civil equality, freedom of movement or association - were
denied systematically and massively. The brute bureaucratic reality of
the apartheid era - an unthinking, everyday denial to individuals of
their basic human dignity - is directly analogous to Hannah Arendt's
famous characterisation of the "banality of evil" in Nazi Germany.

Secondly, the social order underpinned by apartheid also rode roughshod
over "second generation" human rights, such as the right to education,
health care, housing, security and social welfare. The statistics of
racially inscribed inequalities under apartheid are too well known to
require detailed recapitulation: whether the measure is infant mortality,
nutritional intake, life expectancy, literacy, domestic or per capita
earnings, employment levels or property ownership, the findings are the
same. Academic studies have shown that according to internationally
accepted measurements South Africa has the unenviable distinction of
having the most unequal distribution of income for any economy for which
data is available. Apartheid and the callous denial of basic rights that
went with it are directly responsible for the fact that as much as half
of South Africa's population lives below the "least generously drawn
poverty line".

The cumulative impact of apartheid laws and government actions between
1948 and the late 1960s was immense. They allocated political, social,
economic and cultural rights to individuals on the basis of their race.
They inhibited such basic rights as freedom of movement, freedom of
expression, freedom of assembly and freedom of association for millions
of South Africans - and they did so, ironically, at the precise juncture
that these and related rights were recognised as basic human rights
across the globe. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted
in the same year that the National Party won the whites-only general
election on a platform embracing apartheid and swart gevaar.

In the final analysis all this rested on entrenching the dominance of,
and accruing privileges for, the white minority in general and Afrikaners
in particular. The group, and the group only, mattered: to improve its
opulence, promote its languages, cultures, education and other amenities,
at the expense of the black majority. In the inverse, the warping of
white children's minds, their psychological and physical brutalisation in
the security forces, the fear psychosis and denial of independent thought
within the white community - all these mattered not, as long as the
National Party elite consolidated its power.


4.4 The judiciary and other forms of repression


Whole sectors of South African society - the law courts, churches, media,
education, business, sports and cultural sectors - both actively and
indirectly reinforced apartheid exclusion, discrimination and the
violation of human rights. It is not possible to deal in a comprehensive
way with the different forms of the institutionalised gross denial of
human rights under apartheid here, but the shameful behaviour of the
medical establishment in the events surrounding the death of Steve Biko,
and the distortion of justice which systematically occurred in the South
African law courts are just two examples.

Tens of thousands of black South Africans were funnelled through the
apartheid courts, usually without legal representation and with racially
and ideologically biased white, male judges and magistrates in charge,
and turned into criminals in the process, compounding racial polarisation.

At the highest level there was clear support for apartheid, as many
judges were political appointees. As the National Association of
Democratic Lawyers have pointed out, selected judges were in many cases
put in charge of political trials and were responsible for the judicial
murder of people fighting against apartheid. In many cases these judges
allowed evidence that was extracted under torture or duress. Judges
condoned the barbaric practises of the apartheid security police and gave
apartheid terrorism laws a veneer of legal respectability. Together with
magistrates and prosecutors they were quick to defend or cover up police
brutality and thereby facilitate the work of the apartheid security
system, for example in routinely finding (as in the case of Joseph
Mdluli) that people who had undoubtedly been tortured and injured had
died after "falling off a chair" or "slipping down a staircase".

Judicial commissions produced ideologically oriented reports which
promoted the goals of the apartheid state or covered up its culpability
in cases of gross human rights violations, e.g. the Schlebush Commission
of the 1970s, the Kannemeyer Commission investigating the Uitenhage
massacre in 1985, and the Harms Commission. Law societies and bar
councils, which are supposed to be the watchdogs of law and legal
standards, struck from the roll anti-apartheid activists convicted of
crimes against the apartheid state, including Bram Fischer, Ntobeko
Maqubela, Kader Hassim, M.D. Naidoo and Rowley Arenstein. In the 1980s,
in particular, innocent people were charged with "public violence", when
in fact the violence arose from the police and not the public (as in the
infamous Trojan Horse case in Cape Town).

In all of the state institutions referred to above, there were government
appointees who, quite clearly, were carefully chosen to advance the cause
of apartheid. If they were involved in education, they religiously
invoked Bantu education, which subsequently led to the eruption in black
schools in 1976. The Dutch Reformed Church, which provided "biblical"
justification for apartheid, became known as the "National Party at
prayer". Courts of law meted out severe punishments to opponents of
apartheid and proponents of democracy.

What chance would a black person have of acquittal if, for instance, he
or she were an anti-apartheid activist appearing before Justice HHW de
Villiers? This judge, who retired in 1961, wrote a book on the Rivonia
trial. This is how he characterised the African population of South
Africa:

"The Bantu is still at the stage where the Roman people were at the time
of the fall of the Roman Empire when the populus shouted "Give us bread
and the Circus!" (...) The primitive Bantu is still a killer. The Zulu
war cry "bulala!" can still stir them into a frenzy of uncontrolled
aggression and murder. They can so easily be persuaded to kill River and
Paarl killings. One must always remember we have to do with a primitive
people; even higher education does not eradicate their superstitious
beliefs in a generation or two."

The judge's book was an argument for the death penalty in the Rivonia
trial. Clearly, had he been on the bench, he would have sentenced
President Mandela and his co-accused to death.

The catalogue of legal and institutional discrimination that occurred
under apartheid goes on and on and needs acknowledgment if a human rights
culture is to flourish in the new South African legal system. The ANC
therefore supports the call for judges, magistrates and prosecutors
involved in gross travesties of justice to appear before the TRC.


4.5 Forced removals and forced incorporation: A case study of the further
violation of black people's property rights and the institutional
violence of apartheid


Grand apartheid had at its core a vision of a South Africa that belonged
to whites and where black people either lived in bantustans or were
temporary residents in urban areas, while working for whites.

Implementing this vision was a decades-long process that entailed large
population removals as part of an elaborate social and geographical
engineering exercise. The Surplus People Project, which has produced the
most authoritative documentation of the history and scale of forced
removals estimated that between 1960 and 1982 over 3.5 million South
Africans were moved as part of this policy. Tens of thousands of other
people lived for many years under constant threat of losing their homes,
while yet others lost their South African citizenship as boundaries were
redrawn to incorporate them into homelands that were earmarked for
"independence."

These processes resulted in untold human suffering and misery.
Communities were broken up; families were separated and lost their homes
and productive resources such as livestock, trees and farming implements.
In many cases people were not compensated at all. Resistance to forced
removals was met with severe repression by the state and resulted in
people being killed and jailed.

The social dislocation caused by forced removals and the destruction of
viable and cohesive communities has arguably been one of the most
devastating consequences of apartheid.

In most cases communities were put in places far from their original
homes and places of work. Jobs were lost, or people forced to become
migrant workers in order to support their families. Conditions in
resettlement camps were appalling. Often, people were dumped with little
more than tents, tin toilets and trucked-in water. Poverty levels
increased dramatically in these areas.

As a result of forced removal, many children and old people died from
diseases related to malnutrition and poor living conditions.

The policy of forced removals was met with fierce resistance by the
affected communities. In many cases long and expensive legal battles were
fought. Most of these were lost as the legislation in terms of which
removals took place was authoritarian and relied on the powers of
administrative decree and did not allow for review, or recourse. Section
5 of the 1927 Black Administration Act for example, allowed the State
President to order a community to move from any one place in South Africa
to another within a specified period of time. Forced removals were
implemented as a "normal" part of the running of government. Armed with
an arsenal of authoritarian legislation and policy, and backed by the
repressive arms of the state, civil servants carried out actions that
destroyed lives, families and communities. In the process of each
struggle against removal, the state used its repressive powers to a
greater or lesser degree. In the forced removals and the resistance of
the 1980's, detention without trial, torture, and shootings became a
feature of many struggles.

Forced removals began in earnest in the mid 1950s and continued for over
three decades. In recognition of the suffering and loss experienced by
victims of forced removals, the Interim Constitution grants a right of
restitution to specified individuals and groups. But the Restitution
Commission and Land Claims Court only focus on land loss. They do not
provide redress for other forms of loss and suffering experienced by
victims of forced removals, or recognition of the victims' pain and
suffering.

The following cases serve to give some indication of the level of human
rights violations that accompanied the removal process.

Bakubung - The Bakubung live in the North West Province. They resisted
removal for many years. In the process members of the community were
arrested and detained without trial. Some of these people were severely
tortured. Others were charged with treason and at least three leaders of
the community were killed.

Crossroads - The Coloured Labour Preference Policy in the Western Cape
meant that strenuous attempts were made to prevent African people from
settling permanently in the area. Poverty and unemployment in the
Transkei resulted in large numbers of people migrating to the Cape in
search of work. Large informal settlements such as Crossroads were
established and housed this population. Crossroads was destroyed by the
authorities many times. Shacks were bulldozed and people left homeless,
often in the middle of the wet Cape winter. The final destruction of
Crossroads took place in the 1980's and was carried out by a combination
of a vigilante force called the Witdoeke, the "kitskops" of the period,
with the security forces standing by, and in some cases actively
colluding with the attackers.

Langa (Uitenhage) - Langa was one of the oldest Port Elizabeth townships.
Its location close to town meant that for many years its population was
earmarked for removal to a new township further away from town. The
community was well organised and resisted the removal. In June 1986, when
the State of Emergency was declared, the township was removed. The use of
emergency powers, including a gag on the press, was the only way that
this could be carried out. In the early hours of the morning, the
security forces cordoned off the township with barbed wire, any
leadership figures who had not yet been detained were arrested, and the
removal went ahead. In the process community members who tried to resist
were brutally treated.

Mogopa - The Mogopa community was forcibly removed on February 14 1984
after a long period of resistance. The removal took place under Section 5
of the Black Administration Act. The farm was cordoned off and no
outsiders were allowed into the area. The community was then ordered by
the police to demolish their homes and pack their belongings. They were
loaded onto trucks and had to sell their livestock at low prices. They
were dumped at a place called Pachsdraai near the Botswana border. There,
they were placed under the control of a discredited chief who had already
allocated the arable land to the ten families who supported him. The
Mogopa people fled Pachsdraai, rather than live in such misery. Their
wanderings lasted almost ten years, before they finally managed to return
to their homes. During this time, many old people died, a once prosperous
community was reduced to poverty, and all that they had built up on their
land was destroyed.

Mfengu - The Mfengu community was removed from their land in Tsitsikama
to a barren dumping ground in the Ciskei at Keiskammahoek. Conditions
were so bad, and the community so far from employment, that many old
people and children died in the period following the removal. The leaders
of the resistance to the removal were detained and harassed.

Driefontein - The community of Driefontein had its origins in a land
purchase organised by Pixley Ka Seme in 1913. Over the years the
landowners of Driefontein, the Council Board of Directors, built up their
community, and also gave refuge to many evicted farm workers, who became
tenants on the land. The community was identified as a "black spot" by
the government and threatened with forced removal. This was strongly
resisted by the entire community. Its leader Saul Mkhize was shot dead at
a community meeting by a local policeman, Constable Nienaber. Despite the
fact that this was witnessed by hundreds of people, the inquest into
Saul's death found that nobody was to blame for the incident.

Moutse - For many years the Moutse community near Groblersdal
successfully resisted forced removals. The Government then tried to strip
them of their South African citizenship by redrawing boundaries to
incorporate the community into the KwaNdebele bantustan, whose Chief
Minister had agreed to opt for homeland independence.

The Moutse community vowed not to accept this and to fight for their
right to remain South African citizens. On the day that the incorporation
was gazetted, the area was attacked by a group of vigilantes named
Mbokodo. This group, acting in support of the KwaNdebele government,
unleashed a reign of terror on the Moutse community, and on KwaNdebele
residents opposing independence. Mbokodo was then incorporated into the
police force through the municipal police ("kitskop") system, and their
violence and repression became institutionalised. During the two-year
struggle many people were detained, tortured, maimed and killed. The
homes of leaders of the resistance were constantly raided and their
property destroyed. The names of particular policemen, as well as
KwaNdebele politicians, feature over and over again in the statements of
the victims. Despite this, cases were not followed up or investigated
properly by the authorities.

Braklaagte and Leeufontein - As was the case with Moutse, the Braklaagte
and Leeufontein communities, living 20km outside Zeerust were forcibly
incorporated into Bophuthatswana. Due to their resistance community
members experienced years of intense repression. The Braklaagte chief was
deposed by Mangope and a more pliant person was put in his place. A
mobile police station was set up in the village and the police based
there conducted regular raids. Many youths were detained and taken to
Motswedi police station at Lehurutse where they were viciously beaten and
tortured. A number of people were shot dead during this period. A
particularly cruel aspect of this period was the refusal by the
Bophuthatswana police to allow funerals to go ahead. In one bizarre case,
the police confiscated a coffin with the corpse in it and for over a week
moved it from place to place to prevent the family from proceeding with
the burial.

The Group Areas Act also destroyed and displaced Coloured and Indian
communities: there were forced removals from areas such as District Six
in Cape Town, Pageview and Fordsburg in Johannesburg, and Grey Street in
Durban, to quote but a few examples. These removals were also accompanied
by the seizure of property and the withdrawal of business licences; as
well as the application of violence or the threat of it.

The above examples do not provide any of the details of human rights
violations which accompanied forced removals. Nor do they reflect the
countrywide spread of cases. It is clear that forced removals are in
themselves a crime against humanity. People were removed from ancestral
lands; dumped in the middle of nowhere; their community fabric destroyed;
their places of worship vandalised, destroyed or left to stand in waste
far away from the new settlements.

Those responsible for these crimes are the political leaders of the
former regime and the civil servants who turned gross inhumanity into a
bureaucratic system. The wholesale trampling upon first and second
generation human rights of black South Africans reflected in this case
study of forced removals happened on a massive scale at every level of
South African society during the period being investigated by the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission.


4.6 Mass repression by the regime in the face of mass protest


The early 1970s witnessed a slowdown in the economy and increased
privations among the black population. Spontaneous as well as organised
mass resistance began to surface for the first time in a decade. The
emergence of the Black Consciousness Movement, independent trade unions,
and secondary school student organisations was accompanied by an upsurge
of revolt in black tertiary institutions and workers' strikes.

These developments coincided and increasingly interacted with the
reconstruction of an underground presence of the liberation movement.
Regionally, the end of Portuguese fascism hastened the assumption of
power by FRELIMO and the MPLA in Mozambique and Angola respectively;
while in what was then Rhodesia, Smith's illegal UDI regime was under
increasing pressure from ZANU and ZAPU. Internationally, hostility to
apartheid deepened. In 1973 the United Nations General Assembly declared
apartheid "a crime against humanity". Many states which did not support
the resolution in 1973 adopted the same language after the revulsion
engendered by the National Party's ruthless suppression of the youth
revolt in 1976, the murder of Steve Biko in 1977, and the new wave of
bannings.

The apartheid regime had, in this period, expanded its joint operations
with the Rhodesian and Portuguese colonial regimes; and in 1975 invaded
newly-liberated Angola, in an effort to secure the last bastions of white
domination and colonialism in the subcontinent.

Faced with internal mass upsurge, the response of the regime was brute
force: detention, closure of institutions, brutal suppression of
demonstrations and strikes; and, in 1976, cold-blooded shooting of
unarmed pupils. The actions of the regime on 16 June 1976, and in the 18
months following this eruption, brought out in bold relief the
determination of the apartheid regime to deny human rights at all costs.

Notes taken during a Cabinet meeting by Jimmy Kruger, at the time
Minister of Police, reveal an extraordinary level of self-delusion, or
the deliberate denial of reality in order to justify murder:

"10.8.76.
Unrest in Soweto still continues. The children of Soweto are
well-trained. (...) The pupils/students have established student
councils. The basic danger is a growing black consciousness, and the
inability to prevent incidents, what with the military precision with
which they act. The Minister proposes that this movement must be broken
and thinks that police should perhaps act a bit more drastically and
heavy-handedly which will entail more deaths.
Approved."

As the decade came to a close, there was an attempt on the part of the
state to employ a new approach grounded in "total strategy", an explicit
commitment to mobilise military, economic, physical and psychological
resources in defence of the existing order. It brought senior police,
Defence Force and intelligence officers directly into the formulation and
implementation of government policy, through the State Security Council
and the National Security Management System.


4.7 The height of apartheid repression: Counter-revolutionary strategy
and tactics, the National Security Management System, States of
Emergency, and the extra-legal terror of the 1980s


In 1977, PW Botha (at the time Minister of Defence) mapped out the
terrain in which the NSMS would be operating when he introduced the
Defence White Paper:

"The resolution of the conflict in the times in which we now live demands
inter-dependent and co-ordinated action in all fields: military,
psychological, economic, political, sociological, technological,
diplomatic, ideological, cultural, etcetera. We are today involved in a
war whether we like it or not. It is therefore essential that a total
national strategy (is) formulated at the highest level."

The National Security Management System (NSMS) was instituted in 1979 as
the instrument to co-ordinate all state actions and implement reforms in
line with "total strategy". Over the years the government had built a
large network of Security Police and upgraded the police force in general
to deal with mass protest. BOSS, the civilian intelligence agency,
expanded its operations. Torture, recruitment of activists, employment of
agents provocateurs, propaganda against anti-apartheid forces, and the
employment of vigilantes became the stock-in-trade. The NSMS aimed to
achieve maximum efficiency and co-ordination of all these methods, and
drew in the additional capacity of the SADF, particularly its
intelligence wing.

The NSMS, and its later versions, were premised on the belief that it is
possible to manage change through the redefinition of political, military
and economic constructs in a manner to the advantage of those who hold
the levers of state power. The underlying conceptual framework of the
NSMS was that 80% of actions to contain the security threat should be
political, and only 20% military; it was believed that the majority of
people were politically neutral, and only a small radical elite of
"agitators", "communists" and "terrorists" existed, who should be killed.
In this scenario, there was nothing intrinsically wrong with the status
quo. The apartheid state sought to create political stability through
limited reforms to apartheid combined with a variety of measures to
counter the influence of pro-democracy groups and the liberation
movement; these ranged from setting up a range of
"counter-organisations," to attempts to brainwash or psychlogically
influence target groups, to measures designed to defuse material
grievances by upgrading infrastructure and the provision of services,
particularly in those areas considered trouble spots or "oliekol" (oil
spot) townships.

This period saw the genesis of the trend towards increasingly
sophisticated covert operations, continuing into the 1990s, which
included illegal methods (even by the regime's own standards) to suppress
and disrupt the resistance movement. In addition to attempts to bolster
the discredited bantustan and community councillor systems in general,
there were renewed attempts to find or create "credible" alternatives to
the ANC.

Such initiatives included psychological pressure and misinformation
directed at the leadership of Inkatha to drive them further away from the
liberation movement. These methods drew on theories developed on the
basis of experiences of other wars against national liberation movements,
and from methods to destroy dissent adopted by other right-wing regimes,
particularly in Latin America.

The NSMS became fully functional in the mid-1980s as the apartheid state
attempted to destroy the mass popular resistance which had taken root by
this time. As the crisis deepened, the intelligence services,
particularly Military Intelligence, increasingly assumed political
influence and even executive control over this shadow bureaucracy, which
in some respects duplicated the existing administration and displaced its
decision-making structures. The State Security Council (SSC), although
technically a committee of the cabinet, usurped many of the cabinet's
executive functions. The SSC effectively ran the country as a
super-cabinet without any such statutory power, giving credence to the
notion that a creeping military coup was taking place in South Africa.

The 1980s saw successive States of Emergency in which all resources of
the state were harnessed by the NSMS to smash new forms of popular
resistance that had emerged. The leadership of the UDF and its affiliates
was ruthlessly rounded up and restricted. Scores of thousands of people
were detained without trial; and many more were shot dead, maimed,
whipped, tear-gassed and baton-charged. Open political activity by legal
anti-apartheid groups became virtually impossible.

Besides the more conventional forms of state harassment and repressive
laws, anti-apartheid activists and organisations were increasingly
subjected to new terror tactics: "vigilante" groups which sought out and
murdered activists, or launched mass attacks on communities with the
tacit or overt support of the SAP; pseudo-revolutionary groups which
sowed confusion and death in communities; criminal gangs which appeared
to operate above the law as long as most of their victims were
pro-democracy activists; assaults, arson, slashed or over-inflated tyres,
dead cats nailed to doors, bricks crashing through windows, bombed and
burgled offices, kidnappings, increasing attacks on exiles and activists
in neighbouring states, and the ever-present threat of death as
mysterious "hit squads" stepped up their activities.

This extract from a paper titled Some Possibilities in Counter-Insurgency
Operations, written in 1977 by SADF officer and writer on military
affairs, Helmoed-Romer Heitman, is relevant; many tactics of this nature
were adopted against the ANC:

"Operations can include the sabotage/doctoring of discovered arms or
supply caches. The resultant difficulties will sap confidence and morale
as well as creating distrust between the insurgency and its suppliers.
(...) They could range from doctored foodstuffs, via mixing petrol with
paraffin for lamps and tampering with medical supplies, to the placing of
instant detonation fuses in, for example, every tenth hand grenade. The
preference here would be the inflicting of illness or injury, not death,
the former having the added advantage of sapping morale and straining
logistics.

"The intelligence services can also create some havoc by the supplying of
false information, particularly the type to create mistrust. Thus a
leader of the insurgency could be made to appear as a police informer
(..) Further, some extra-legal operations may prove beneficial both in
eliminating certain key members of the insurgency and in sowing
suspicion. Needless to say, such operations would need to be
well-disguised."

If resistance took on a mass character in the 1980s, so did repression
and the deliberate flouting of human rights by the security forces and
their masters.

4.7.1 The co-ordinating mechanism for repression in the 1980s: the NSMS

Ultimate control over the SSC and the NSMS was vested in the Office of
the State President, who chaired the SSC.

The statutory functions of the SSC included advising the Government with
regard to


"(i) the formulation of national policy and strategy in relation to the
security of the Republic and the manner in which such policy or strategy
shall be implemented and be executed;

(ii) a policy to combat any particular threat to the security of the
Republic."


The SSC was served by a Secretariat consisting of around 100 full-time
staff seconded from various state departments. This Secretariat was
divided into four branches: the Strategy branch, the Strategic
Communications Branch, the National Intelligence Interpretation Branch,
and an Administration Branch.

The activities of this SSC Secretariat, particularly the Strategic
Communications Branch, are of particular importance to investigations
into gross human rights abuses in the 1980s and 1990s. The Strategic
Communications branch, according to a former SAP officer who was seconded
to this structure, was tasked with working out a total package of
strategy alternatives in response to requests coming from Ministries,
government departments, or JMCs. Such strategies could include tactics
such as assassinations, attacks on neighbouring countries, economic
sabotage, campaigns of character defamation, setting up front companies,
propaganda campaigns - in general, the entire gamut of what have come to
be known as "dirty tricks" operations. Such plans would be passed up the
chain of command to the SSC which would select the appropriate strategy.
Implementation would be carried out at the level of the Strategic
Communications Branch, or sent down the NSMS chain for implementation at
other levels, and any group, institution or individual considered
appropriate could be drawn in to implement such plans. Every government
department had "stratkom" committees, at times called "nodal points" or
"special services."

Examples of work of this nature include the establishment of a network of
state agents in the media, the diversion of trade union subscription
payments into a private bank account, in order to disrupt the activities
of the union and sow suspicion the members and the leadership, exploding
a bomb outside a cinema showing a film about Steve Biko, followed by the
use of agents in the media to implicate the AWB. Other operations were
far more elaborate, crossed international borders and continued over an
extended period of time. According to former SAP officer John Horak, who
served on structures of this nature, stratkom operations, most simply
expressed, aim to "rout the enemies of the government" and "give the
government the space to do what it wants to do." Stratkom operations rest
on the "principle" that it is perceptions, rather than the truth, which
matter.

At the level of the SSC the actual operational details of any project
were not discussed, specifically in order to make it technically true for
political officials to deny all knowledge of many of these covert actions.

Under the overall direction of the SSC, thirteen Interdepartmental
Committees co-ordinated the activities of relevant government
departments. At a regional and local level it co-ordinated the work of 10
Joint Management Centres (JMCs) the boundaries of which coincided with
the 10 Regional SADF Commands (and one other JMC for the Walvis Bay
military area); 60 sub-JMCs with their boundaries corresponding to those
of the SAP Districts, and over 350 mini JMCs existing at municipal / SADF
Commando area level.

This singular network of JMC structures was tasked with the co-ordination
of "social upliftment", security and intelligence-gathering functions.
Every JMC structure consisted of four committees: welfare intelligence
security and communications - more accurately, disinformation and
propaganda. Government departments at all levels, parastatals, and
business representatives were drawn into the network, and "community
liaison forums" were set up in an attempt to extend the network to
grassroots level.

The SSC therefore controlled a totalitarian national network which
reached into every part of the country, identifying anti-apartheid
activities, formulating a continuous national security profile, and
making decisions on action at national and local levels which could then
be implemented by the formal law enforcement structures backed by
legislation, or by other structures acting covertly. As Max Coleman of
the Human Rights Commission put it, "here we encounter, not acts of
Parliament, no laws nor promulgated regulations, but centres of control
receiving information, making decisions and issuing instructions. All
without any constitutional status, but nevertheless supported by secret
budgets and resources with no public accountability."

With the declaration of the first State of Emergency, the National Joint
Management Centre (NJMC), chaired by the Deputy Minister of Law and
Order, took over as the nerve centre for macro co-ordination of all
welfare and security policies. Located in the Office of the State
President, the NJMC was tasked with the executive co-ordination of the
implementation of SSC decisions, and managed the Emergency on a
day-to-day basis. Roelf Meyer took over this post from Adriaan Vlok at
the beginning of December 1985.

By mid-1986 the State Security Council and the NJMC formed the apex of
state power. These committees and their subsidiary network of
co-ordinated structures that made up the NSMS bordered on constituting a
separate arm of government, and became the vanguard of state action.

4.7.2 Formal repression

Formal repression in the 1980s was based on repressive laws passed by the
apartheid parliament and the existence of a massive law enforcement
machinery. In addition over 32,000 SADF troops were deployed in 96
townships in 1985 to support the SAP.

Using laws like the Internal Security Act (No 74 of 1982), the 1953
Public Safety Act and the Public Safety Amendment Act (No 67 of 1986), as
well as bantustan variations of these laws, the apartheid authorities
were able to place severe restrictions on legitimate political and social
activities and invade every corner of public and private life. For
example:

* Successive States of Emergency, covering a large number of
  magisterial districts, were in operation from 1985 to 1989.
* Over 80,000 people, including over 1,500 children were detained
  without trial, some for periods of up to two and a half years.
* According to human rights groups, over 10,000 detainees were
  tortured, assaulted or suffered other forms of abuse.
* Over 70 detainees died in detention during this period.
* At least 3,000 people were banned restricted and placed under house
  arrest.
* Hundreds of activists had their passports withdrawn.
* Over 500 people were gagged by the Consolidated List; they could not
  be quoted, even once deceased.
* Several newspapers and publications were banned, suspended or
  restricted - over 35,000 books were banned for possession and
  distribution in South Africa between 1960 and 1991, and in some cases
  newspapers were prohibited even from printing blank spaces where
  material had been censored.
* Thousands of people were prosecuted in numerous political trials.
  Many were jailed and others executed, 7 people in just 1988/9, for
  example.
* Over 100 organisations were banned as unlawful, or restricted either
  fully or partially.
* Outdoor political gatherings were banned and literally thousands of
  indoor gatherings were banned. Funerals were restricted. Such
  gatherings were frequently dispersed by violent means on the grounds
  that they were illegal.

In addition, "legal" measures were at times used for political reasons to
deliberately disrupt attempts to halt violence, particularly in
KwaZulu-Natal. On the eve of peace talks between the UDF and Inkatha in
mid-1989, Adriaan Vlok tightened restrictions on key UDF negotiators -
effectively placing them under house arrest - thereby disrupting the
process. According to lawyers acting for the UDF and Cosatu at this time,
this was the seventh occasion since November 1987 on which Vlok had acted
at crucial moments to derail peace moves in the region.

4.7.3 Informal repression and counter-mobilisation: surrogates,
"vigilantes", hit squads, and "stratkom" operations

Under the States of Emergency in the 1980s, the government placed bans on
every conceivable form of political protest, including work stayaways. In
addition to these "lawful" repressive measures, a range of covert
activities were conducted by the state or its proxies against the
democratic opposition.


4.7.3.1 Theories of counter-revolutionary warfare


It is worth revisiting the theories of counter-revolutionary warfare
which underpinned state violence and covert activities in the 1980s and
1990s. The counter-revolutionary warfare tactics implemented during the
1980s were adopted from the writings of various Western military
strategists; one of the most favoured for his "practical" approach was
the American Vietnam veteran, Col. JJ McCuen, whose recommendations for
the implementation of counter-revolutionary warfare tactics were used as
the basis for a handbook titled The Art of Counter-Revolutionary Warfare,
which was distributed amongst state officials. In essence, the tactics
adopted were "hard" security measures against political opponents of the
state, combined with WHAM ("Winning Hearts and Minds") tactics aimed at
defusing political grievances and promoting right-wing ideologies among
the general population. French theorist Andre Baufr's maxim that "wars
are not won on the battlefield, but in the minds of men" was a guiding
principle.

The manual contained the following framework for the implementation of
WHAM tactics:

In order to ensure that "radical" movements cannot root themselves
amongst the people, the following steps are to be taken:

1. "Annihilate" or "eliminate" the enemy
2. Restore effective administration
3. Implement a co-ordinated WHAM campaign consisting of the following
   components:

   3.1 Civil education:


   3.1.1 Create "a good working relationship with the masses" by
   "identifying problems locally...and implementing corrective measures"

   3.1.2 Implement an extensive programme to train "loyal leaders" and
   the youth for local administration


   3.2 Counter-organisation :

   This, says the handbook, is the "main weapon against revolutionaries".
   Government must "take the lead under all groups, classes, clubs, and
   societies with the organisation of social, career, sport, education,
   medical, religious, and military activities." The population "must
   become involved and identify with the group's activities."


   3.2.1 "Self-defence" - this is "the most important part of
   counter-organisation of the masses."

   The recruitment of "local militia" must be undertaken with the help of
   local leaders. These militia must be armed and form "the bridge
   between the administration and the masses"; they should "therefore be
   politically oriented", ie. they should "influence/mobilise the masses."

   3.2.2 Security forces must be "extremely mobile and able to support
   self-defence units immediately."



4. Intelligence

   An effective intelligence system is vital, and government must have "a
   covert intelligence system with roots among the masses and all
   organisations."


   4.1 To manage this intelligence-gathering process, joint committees of
   "security forces and administrative and political institutions" must
   be established.


5. Area Defence

   This must be carried out by the military in close co-operation with
   the administration, and assist with the building of roads, dams,
   irrigation schemes, schools, churches, etc.


The theory of Low-Intensity Warfare (LIW) rests on much the same
framework, but places far more stress on the use of proxy forces and
propaganda. It is "low-intensity" warfare from the point of view of the
regime engaged in a struggle against revolutionary or national liberation
movements, in the sense that their direct involvement is minimised as far
as possible. For those communities targeted in this manner, it is total
war and terror at grassroots level.

The overall aim of LIW is the defeat of a national liberation movement,
and this requires that a credible "moderate" alternative to such a
movement be fostered or created. Examples of groups of this nature are
provided by UNITA in Angola, and Renamo in Mozambique, which the Pretoria
regime took over from the Rhodesian security forces at the end of the
1970s; attempts to build Inkatha into a political force to rival the ANC
began in earnest in the 1980s. If it is not possible to build a credible
alternative, then the emphasis in LIW strategy moves towards attempting
to transform the liberation movement from within through massive
destabilisation of its support base and a range of other measures aimed
at so radically altering the political variables that the liberation
movement becomes ineffectual, rather than by trying to defeat it in
direct battle.

The aim was not just to restore law and order, at all costs, on the terms
of the apartheid regime, but was considerably more sinister: it was about
brainwashing and social engineering on all levels, an attempt to "recast
the foundations of civil society so that political access points could at
some future date be restructured in a way that (would) not threaten the
system as a whole", and to this end the state attempted to "radically
restructure the moral, cultural, religious, political and material
underpinnings of civil society in the black townships."


4.7.3.2 Counter-mobilisation in action


Besides the case of Renamo, which was employed with devastating effect in
the destabilisation campaign against the Mozambican government, the
illegally occupied territory of Namibia served in important respects as a
testing ground for certain counter-revolutionary tactics later applied in
South Africa. By the mid-1970s, there was widespread, systematic and
violent repression in place in this country, along with attempts to
implement "hearts and minds" tactics. SADF members were deployed in
schools, on agricultural projects, in training programmes, and a host of
other civilian structures in the hope that assistance of this nature
would defuse pro-SWAPO sentiment by addressing material grievances linked
to poverty and lack of development. These tactics met with very little
success, and were undermined by the systematic violence and terrorism
visited against communities by easily identifiable members of the
occupying force, such as (to give but one example) the practice of
dragging the bodies of dead activists or members of SWAPO's armed wing
through villages behind military vehicles.

By 1980, the Pretoria regime had set in place a range of paramilitary
units, some of which would later be replicated or redeployed in South
Africa with devastating effect. Units called the Home Guards were
initially set up to protect bantustan leaders and tribal chiefs
considered assets by Pretoria; they were generally despised for
committing atrocities against their own people. The Special Constables
were also widely feared, and were responsible for many murders of
civilians. And the first reports on a covert SAP counter-insurgency unit
known as Koevoet ("crowbar") surfaced in May 1980 along with a hit list
of people to be assassinated by this unit. Koevoet had been established
in 1978, and soon achieved notoriety for many murders and atrocities,
particularly in the north of Namibia.

By around 1983 it was acknowledged that the relatively unsophisticated
"hearts and minds" tactics adopted to date were not working, and that any
suggestion of direct connections to the SADF were enough to guarantee the
failure of projects of this nature. Far more elaborate, covert methods
would have to be adopted to "counter-mobilise" the Namibian population
against SWAPO.

To this end a unit code-named Etango was established, under the overall
guidance of Dr. Louis Pasques. Etango included many of those SADF
personnel, especially those linked to Military Intelligence
Communications Operations units, and to the Directorate: Covert
Collection, who would later surface in South Africa under the guise of
"experts" working for Adult Education Consultants (AEC) and in fronts set
up by the Directorate: Covert Collection. It appears that the primary aim
of Etango was to establish a tribally based, conservative "Owambo
movement" to counter SWAPO, while a similar project code-named Ezuva
aimed to set up a "Kavango movement". During 1985 and 1986, operatives
linked to Etango moved into South Africa and began setting up a range of
front companies in order to pursue similar objectives inside South Africa
against the ANC through the use of "black-on-black" violence of various
kinds, the fostering of viable alternative "liberation movements", and
spreading NP propaganda through a range of "Christian cultural"
organisations particularly among the coloured community in the Western
Cape.

A top secret memorandum dated 29/07/86, titled Extension of
Counter-Mobilisation Strategy, sent from the Chief-of-Staff: Intelligence
to the Head of the SADF, provides important information of relevance to
the inquiries of the TRC. According to this memorandum, it was decided in
1985 to set up a front organisation to achieve the aims of Project Ancor,
which had been approved by the Minister of Defence in the second half of
1985, and which included a wide range of covert projects. It has since
emerged (in response to a question put to the Minister of Defence in
Parliament) that the front organisation set up to carry out Project Ancor
was the closed corporation Adult Education Consultants CC.

Project Kampong fell under Project Ancor, and was responsible for the
"physical running of peoples' organisations and movements" - projects
which attempted to manipulate civil society on a wide range of fronts. No
fewer than 23 sub-projects in Namibia and South Africa were running in
mid-1986, including Etango, Ezuva, the "Natal trade union" (a probable
reference to the covertly-funded UWUSA), the Eagles Youth Club in the
Free State, projects in KwaNdebele, Venda and QwaQwa, a project aimed at
the "mobilisation of moderate Black leaders in South Africa", a project
aimed at mobilising traditional healers, several projects aimed at
influencing coloured people and MPs, a research project at the University
of Stellenbosch, and two projects misusing religion in an attempt to
cultivate support for the regime.

The head of AEC, Dr Louis Pasques, was (and perhaps still is) a member of
the Broederbond. A former Assistant Director of education, he was
seconded to the office of PW Botha in 1985, and served on the SSC.
Pasques had also been Inspector of the compulsory "Youth Preparedness"
brainwashing programme introduced in white schools in 1970. Dr. JL van
der Westhuizen was the other most senior official heading AEC. By 1986
there were regional offices of AEC in Pretoria, Johannesburg, Louis
Trichardt, Nelspruit, Pinetown, Port Elizabeth, Kimberley and Cape Town.
Each office was headed by a manager and divided into three sub-sections:
administration, training, and projects. Most AEC affiliates had military
training grounds at their disposal. Another network of fronts set up by
Pasques fell under the South African Christian Cultural Organisation
(Sacco.)

During 1986, work of this nature gathered momentum as the state battled
to contain the growing popular revolt in the country. As the memorandum
in question puts it, "counter-mobilisation" is a "critically important
component of the counter-revolutionary strategy of the RSA"; and notes
that the Minister of Defence had ordered that "counter-mobilisation
activities inside South Africa must be drastically extended, and actions
in SWA must also be intensified." Such actions are described as "very
probably the core on which will depend the continued existence of a free
Western civilisation in South Africa." (p 5). According to this memo,
Etango and Ezuva had already grown into a "force to be reckoned with in
SWA politics". "If an election is to be won in SWA, a drastic increase in
counter-mobilisation activities would be required", says the memo (p. 2).
Control of these fronts had by 1986 been transferred to the
Administrator-General of Namibia, although the SADF still acted in an
"executive capacity."

Whilst we have focused on certain operations, there were many other
fronts and projects which were covertly set up and financed with public
funds. Project Vallex, running by 1987/8, was also specifically aimed at
"removing the UDF from communities by means of violence using the
colour-against-colour principle"; there were Projects Pippa, Kalmoes,
Lambent, Lactone, Lion Life and Resource Corporation, and Project
Christian Life Centre, to name just a few others. Extensive as Project
Ancor and its sub-project Kampong were, their 1987/8 budgets are listed
as falling under Main Project Orange, about which no information has yet
come to light; it is hoped the Commission will discover the full nature
and extent of the activities carried out under the auspices of Main
Project Orange, as well all other covert operations of this nature.


4.7.3.3 Vigilantism, surrogates, and the role of Adult Education
Consultants


From mid- to late 1985 onwards, during the period in which Roelf Meyer
chaired the NJMC, Adult Education Consultants (AEC) set up or reinforced
a range of paramilitary anti-ANC/UDF/Cosatu groups across the country. In
addition, they ran various seminars designed to promote right-wing
"Christian" values, particularly targeted at the Western Cape. It appears
that in some cases "seminars" amounted to little more than attempted
brainwashing and incitement to violence against the UDF and other
progressive organisations.

In early 1985, and in an extraordinarily high number of cases in October
and November 1985, various "vigilante" and, to a lesser extent,
pseudo-revolutionary groups suddenly appeared in townships all over the
country, from Pietersburg in the north to Cape Town in the south. The
"vigilantes" were responsible for massive bloodshed and misery as they
launched their onslaught against pro-democracy groups. Often drawn from
conservative traditional groupings, the ranks of the desperately
unemployed and even criminal gangs (such as the Three Million, and later,
the AmaSinyora, the Black Cats, the Toasters, to name a few), the
vigilantes intervened in local politics when called upon or paid to do
so. In all cases they violently attacked members of pro-democracy groups,
acted in support of unpopular local or regional authorities which the
apartheid regime saw as being essential to the success of its limited
reform programme, and were allowed to operate brazenly by the SAP, who
either refused to intervene or actively supported such groups. It appears
the "vigilantes" were largely playing the role of "self-defence" units as
envisaged in McCuen's blueprint. The Riot Squad (later renamed the
Internal Stability Division) was particularly prominent in lending
support to groups of this nature.

During the same period, in November 1985, Minister of Constitutional
Development Chris Heunis announced that at least five thousand municipal
police, also known as "kitskonstabels" (instant constables) would be
trained over the next six months. Most were deployed to bolster unpopular
community councillors - a re-run of the tactic used in Namibia in the
early 1980s. A Black Sash report in 1988 on the municipal police noted
that the "hidden agenda" of those deploying these officials was "revealed
by the pattern of their abuses: they were intended to divide communities
and disrupt organisations", rather than restore law and order. Their
efforts complemented those of a range of other groups involved in
"informal" or extra-legal repression.

In contrast with earlier footage showing white police shooting protestors
armed with bricks and stones, which had so negatively influenced the
attitudes of overseas television audiences, the state was no longer
perceived to be in the forefront of the violence - now it was
"black-on-black violence", a key propaganda term coined at this time and
vigorously promoted.This was what was supposed to distinguish some of
this violence from earlier clashes between the security forces and
pro-democracy groups, (this violence was portrayed as the understandable
backlash of conservative groups against the excesses of the youth or the
"radical" policies of pro-democracy groups). In other cases, both
antagonists were supposedly anti-apartheid movements,

A case study is provided by the AmaAfrika National Front or Project
Henry, a group led by the self-styled "Reverend" Ebenezer Maqina, which
adopted pseudo-radical "black consciousness" positions. This group was
envisaged as forming the nucleus of "cultural front" organisations in the
Eastern Cape, according to former AEC regional head Brig. Ben Conradie,
who ran the project. Food parcels delivered by the Department of National
Health and Population Development to the home of the regional AEC head
were taken to Maqina for distribution among the needy. By March 1985,
supporters of the AmaAfrika National Front, which was later linked to,
and then expelled from, Azapo, were engaged in a bloody struggle with UDF
supporters in townships in the Port Elizabeth area. Many civilians were
killed; by June 1985 these areas were described as being like a war zone.
The murders of Matthew Goniwe and his companions were ascribed to
UDF/Azapo conflict by the propaganda machinery of the regime. Other
vigilante Groups falling under the Eastern Cape branch of Adult Education
Consultants were the Memesis and Kekanas, grouped around unpopular
councillors.

In another key example from mid- 1986, the Witdoeke of the Western Cape
destroyed KTC in co-operation with local JMC structures, with the Riot
Squad playing a particularly important role in backing up the attackers.
During the court case brought by residents in March 1988, Roelf Meyer
issued a certificate in terms of the Internal Security Act blocking
access to all JMC documents from May-June 1986 "in the interests of state
security."

Operation Marion

From late 1985 onwards, plans for what was later know as Operation Marion
were being laid. A top secret memo titled Report of the Work Group on a
Security Structure for KwaZulu was made public by the prosecution in the
trial of former Minister of Defence Magnus Malan and others; the manner
in which the concept of counter-mobilisation was understood and
implemented by the former apartheid regime is bluntly expressed. On the
second page of this report it is stated that from the point of view of
the SADF, the strategic objective of these activities were as follows:


"(4) To limit UDF/ANC intimidation amongst the black population by means
of Inkatha. (Our emphasis)

"(5) To establish Inkatha as a more effective organisation against the
ANC/UDF and related organisations on political, social and psychological
terrains. (Our emphasis.)

"(6) To use Inkatha's intelligence potential to maximum effect for the
RSA."


This memo noted that according to decisions taken at a SSC meeting on
03/02/86, the Department of Constitutional Development and Planning was
tasked with "overall co-ordination of the project", which underlines that
Project Marion was not aimed solely at developing an offensive military
capacity within Inkatha. The SSC had also decided that the successful
implementation of the "paramilitary element" of this project "would pave
the way for similar projects in other National States" (ie. bantustans.)
In fact, by mid-1986 plans to set up a covertly run, anti-ANC "Xhosa
Resistance Movement" in the Eastern Cape were in place.

It is clear that this Work Group was following the recommendations of
McCuen and other theorists closely. The minutes show that it was proposed
that a "paramilitary capacity" be established, consisting of six main
elements; the first three are the most important. Firstly, a
"counter-mobilisation capacity" to "neutralise the UDF in particular".
This would entail increasing Inkatha's communications and propaganda
capacity, and its "ability to organise the population with the KwaZulu
culture (sic) as basis for mobilisation" through organisations based in
various civil arenas: the youth, students, workers, women, sport, and
culture are specifically mentioned.

Secondly, this paramilitary capacity should have "a defensive element,
ie. a militia-type organisation" which would have a well-trained core
group supported by part-time recruits who would have less specialised
training. Members of these militia would be expected to recruit and train
other units with assistance from the Department of Military Intelligence.

Thirdly, there should be a "small, full-time offensive element which can
be used covertly against the UDF/ANC"; fourthly, assistance in the
training of a group of loyal Inkatha members for the physical protection
of senior Inkatha officials. It was envisaged that the same "offensive
unit" would be used for both covert hit squad work and the protection of
Inkatha officials (p.7). Other measures included the improvement of
Inkatha's intelligence capacity and extending the powers of the KZP.

It was proposed that the Directorate: Special Tasks be tasked with
managing the paramilitary aspect of this project since this sector of the
SADF " has the most experience in handling similar tasks (externally)"
(p.6). The Directorate: Special Tasks was that sector of Military
Intelligence responsible for the Special Forces ("Recces") and the covert
support of "contra" groups in neighbouring states, particularly UNITA and
Renamo: support for Renamo was code-named Operation Milia, with 5
Reconnaissance Regiment in Phalaborwa the main source of training and
support for this proxy force.

The Task Group proposed that a front organisation be established by
Chief-of-Staff: Intelligence to take on these responsibilities. The
counter-mobilisation work would be done "by DMI in co-operation with
Ultra Ed (Dr Pasque)", says the memo (p 8.) Subsequent information made
public by disaffected Inkatha official Mbongeni Khumalo has indicated
that AEC's regional office in Natal known as Creed Consultants were
responsible for arranging the paramilitary aspects of this training as
well as counter-mobilisation work in various sectors of of civil society
in the region.

Operation Katzen: A "Xhosa Resistance Movement"

In mid-1986, in response to orders from PW Botha to stabilise this
region, plans were drawn up for the formation of a unified Eastern Cape
region as an eventually "independent" anti-ANC "Xhosaland". This
hare-brained scheme envisaged establishing a Xhosa Resistance Movement
which would "operate under the cover of a front organisation."

In a memo outlining the plan dated 13/06/86 from Brig. CP ("Joffel") Van
der Westhuizen (head of the Eastern Cape JMC at the time) to the Chief of
the Army, it is stated (p.9):


"(4) (...) This XWB must in nature - and even extent - be similar to
Inkatha and must together with our security forces form a
counter-revolutionary front.

"(5) The co-option of existing (struggling) black resistance movements
into the ranks of the XWB. This makes one think among others of the
Kekanas of Cookhouse, Memesi of Somerset East, and Maqina's Black Crisis
Centre of Port Elizabeth."


The memo states in point 19(d) "Covert, Xhosa-speaking forces (troops)
must be assigned to the XWB so that the movement, especially in the
beginning, can have teeth" (p 19.) By November 1986 the plan was being
activated, and in February 1987 an attempt to "permanently remove" Lennox
Sebe took place.


4.7.3.4 "Hit Squads" extra-legal terror and assassination


The successful implementation of WHAM tactics, according to the theories
guiding the Pretoria regime, depended on "eliminating the enemy" and
restoring effective administration. Units linked to the CCB and Vlakplaas
tasked with "taking out" activists began operations in earnest during
this period. Some information on a hit squad known as "Hammer", operating
in the Eastern Cape by the mid-1980s, has come to light. By June 1985,
the United Democratic Front listed at least 27 people as missing and 12
victims of assassinations. These acts of terror were aimed precisely at
those areas where resistance was strongest; anti-apartheid activists were
forced to flee or go into hiding. The role of the NSMS in co-ordinating
actions of this nature was revealed in the "death signal" dated 07/06/85
sent to the SSC from the head of the Eastern Cape JMC, "Joffel" van der
Westhuizen, recommending the murders of the "Cradock Four" - Matthew
Goniwe, Sparrow Mkhonto, Fort Calata and Sicelo Mhlawuli.

In October 1985, senior officials met Chief Buthelezi and falsely claimed
that there were plans to eliminate him. By early 1986 the plans for
Operation Marion were in place, and the first group of trainees to be
given training in offensive, "hit squad" tactics were secretly sent to
the Caprivi strip later that year, with the regional AEC affiliate, Creed
Consultants, in charge of co-ordinating this training.

The Human Rights Commission recorded around 100 assassinations and 200
attempted assassinations of anti-apartheid figures inside and outside the
country between 1974 and 1989. Assassinations became a regular feature of
South African political life, escalating sharply in the negotiations
phase, before ending abruptly in 1993.

Assassinations were also a form of "armed propaganda". The state had all
the means at its disposal to detain, restrict or imprison those who
opposed it, yet adopted deliberate terrorist tactics in choosing to
assassinate certain activists. The message was clear: those who were
deploying these units would stop at nothing to crush dissent, and the
degree of collusion in covering the activities of such units by the
highest reaches of political, judicial and security structures, as well
as the magnitude of the lies broadcast by the propaganda machinery at the
disposal of the state, served to project the desired image of an enemy so
efficient, amoral and ruthless that it was virtually suicidal to oppose
it.

The KwaMakutha Massacre

It is our contention that the KwaMakutha massacre of January 20th, 1987,
provides one of the clearest examples of the manner in which all these
earlier initiatives of the apartheid state were drawn together via the
NSMS to co-ordinate action on the ground in accordance with its strategic
interests, and the callous manner in which civilians were slaughtered to
achieve such political objectives.

Twelve women and children were killed in this attack by men who had been
secretly trained on the Caprivi Strip in line with Operation Marion. The
attack was portrayed as the work of "ANC terrorists" by Pretoria's
propaganda machinery in an attempt to derail a crucial meeting between OR
Tambo and George Schultz; this meeting was a major breakthrough for the
ANC in its continuing efforts to convince the international community to
refuse all support for the apartheid regime.

It is not reasonable to believe that the actual perpetrators of this
massacre, or even higher command structures within the security forces,
could have independently devised a strategic communications operation of
this nature. This case provides a vital indicator of how easily the truth
could be obscured unless the overall context in which violence took place
is kept in firm focus: to only identify the specific agents of the
KwaMakutha massacre and other similar atrocities will do nothing to
expose the true perpetrators of violence of this nature, who co-ordinated
political and military actions in support of the apartheid state through
the NSMS, renamed the National Co-ordinating Mechanism under FW de Klerk
in 1990.


4.7.3.5 Chemical War: use of poisoning


The apartheid regime did not shrink from the use of poison in its
attempts to murder its opponents inside the country and abroad; over the
years several anti-apartheid activists have died from poisoning, while
others had narrow escapes from this fate. In addition, there is evidence
that the former apartheid regime used chemical weapons in attacks in
neighbouring states.

Poisoning was a method adopted by the Rhodesian security forces,
particularly the Selous Scouts. In his book Serving Secretly Ken Flower
described how Selous Scouts members would pose as ZANU guerillas, recruit
activists and kit them out with uniforms impregnated with poison similar
to that used on anti-apartheid activists some years later. These recruits
would then be sent to training camps but would die a slow death in the
bush before reaching their destinations. In other cases a river and water
reservoir were poisoned, causing hundreds of deaths.

These methods were adopted by the Pretoria regime. In an incident in 1977
popularly known as "Black September", SAP agents who had infiltrated MK
attempted to wipe out some 500 MK cadres undergoing training at Catengue
camp in Angola by poisoning their food.

In 1981, student activist Siphiwo Mthimkulu fell seriously ill shortly
after his release from five months of detention. He had been well-fed
while in detention. Doctors at Groote Schuur hospital discovered he had
been poisoned with a rare substance known as thallium, which left him
seriously ill and confined to a wheelchair. Mthimkulu sued the Minister
of Law and Order, but shortly afterwards disappeared, along with his
companion, Topsy Madaka; their car was found near the Lesotho border.
Dirk Coetzee has said that he was ordered to kill Mthimkulu; although the
order was withdrawn, Coetzee says he was later told by SAP officers that
the activist had been abducted and eliminated.

Coetzee has also stated that he was given poison on more than one
occasion by former SAP forensics chief Lothar Neethling; in one instance
this was to get rid of an MK cadre, Selby Mavusu ("Vusi") who had been
among those captured during the 1981 raid on Matola, and who would not
co-operate with his captors. Neethling sued two newspapers which
published these allegations; in January 1991 Supreme Court judge Johan
Kriegler dismissed his damages claims against these newspapers, and found
he had attempted to mislead the court. Lothar Neethling appealed against
this judgement and won his case.

In the same year, the Committee of South African War Resisters (COSAWR)
reported that information had been received from a disaffected SADF
soldier on the use of drugs (particularly scopolamine and morphine) to
torture and gain information from detainees at a base in Oshakati, in
northern Namibia. It was further alleged that the SA Medical Services had
set up medical intelligence units under the guidance of Argentinean
personnel who regularly visited the base. It was also reported that the
SADF was preparing to use nerve gas or chemical weapons in the region in
the near future. In another case involving Namibian activists, Irish
national Donald Acheson, suspected of being involved in the murder of
Anton Lubowski, testified that he had been told by the CCB to contaminate
personal toiletries belonging to Gwen Lister, editor of the
anti-apartheid newspaper The Namibian , with a slow-acting poison.

Luke Lukwezi, recruited by the SAP in 1985, was sent to infiltrate the
ANC and commit acts of sabotage, pass on information, and poison cadres.
He had been given a box of poison by his handlers, and in September 1986
poured most of this powder into soft porridge being prepared for cadres
at Cherlston transit camp in Lusaka; about forty people had to be rushed
to hospital. Another SAP agent, Fika Gwala, was responsible for poisoning
four people, including Richard Khambule in Dakawa, Tanzania; he was
arrested by the ANC in 1987.

In 1987, Leslie Lesia was arrested in Zimbabwe after he had been caught
in Mozambique by the ANC; he had a small bottle of poison in his
possession. He testified in court that he had been given poison by the
SADF's Department of Military Intelligence to use on ANC members and
officials. A booby-trapped TV set he had imported into Zimbabwe blew up,
killing the wife of an ANC official. In 1988, there was an attempt to
distribute poisoned sugar among ANC officials in Mozambique.

The current Minister of Justice, Dullah Omar, nearly fell victim to
poisoning: Edward James Gordon, known as "Peaches", testified to the
Harms Commission that his CCB handlers had given him a powder with
instructions to sprinkle this over Omar's food to induce a heart attack.
"Peaches" was subsequently assassinated.

Church officials were not exempt from such attacks - after an abortive
attempt to poison Fr. John Osmers, he was maimed with a parcel bomb. In
1989, the Rev. Frank Chikane narrowly escaped death when he became
violently and acutely ill on three occasions while on trips to Namibia
and the USA. It was discovered that some of his clothing was impregnated
with a poison of the organophosphate group - very similar to that used by
the Selous Scouts. In the same year, ANC security department official
Jackie Mabusa and a companion both died after drinking poisoned beer in a
Lusaka nightclub.

Other ANC members who died of poisoning include Mandla Msibi, who died in
1982 in Swaziland, Samuel Phinda who died in Mozambique, and Themba Ngesi
who died of poisoning in Mozambique in September 1986.

Thami Zulu died within a few days of his release from detention by the
ANC's security department. He had been held whilst an investigation was
conducted to determine why such an extremely high number of cadres in
units falling under his command were being captured or killed. A
post-mortem showed that Thami Zulu had ingested Diazinon, an
organophosphate pesticide, shortly before his death. Whilst there is no
certainty as to whether Thami Zulu was acting on behalf of Pretoria, in
two similar cases the suspicion exists that agents of the apartheid
regime, probably linked to the Department of Military Intelligence,
poisoned Francis Meli in 1992 and former ANC Chief Representative in
London, Solly Smith, in 1993. Smith had confessed to being linked to
apartheid intelligence services, and it is suspected he was murdered
because he had indicated that he was prepared to talk about his
activities.

The use of "asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases" is outlawed by the
1925 Geneva Protocol, to which South Africa has been a signatory; and
international law prohibits the use of napalm against civilians. In 1968
it was announced that the manufacture of napalm had begun, and this was
used extensively in Namibia and Angola. There have also been reports on
the use of demobilising gases in Namibia, and an investigation by the
UNHCR and the World Health Organisation into the 1978 Kassinga Massacre
in Namibia noted that a paralysing gas had been used to immobilise some
of the victims before they were murdered.

There is evidence that Renamo was being supplied with poison gases. In
1983, when the Mozambican army captured a Renamo base at Tome, 40mm
shells containing a toxic substance were found. As recently as January
16th, 1992, there was a chemical attack on Mozambican government troops
which left at least 80 troops dead. Four commando companies were
attacking Ngungwe, near Ressano Garcia, at the time one of the largest
Renamo strongholds in Southern Mozambique. It is believed that Renamo was
seeking to preserve an elite group of around two thousand troops who
would remain outside a unified Mozambican defence force. In July of that
year a report by British expert Dr JP Thompson produced a report
commissioned by the United Nations, which found that the effects of the
agent used were entirely consistent with a chemical warfare agent.

It has very recently been discovered that Project B, a top-secret,
multi-million rand project run by the former SADF, included chemical and
biological weapons projects; these were still being run with public funds
as late as 1993. It has been alleged by people close to these programmes
that these projects were not only defensive, but were part of the ongoing
"dirty tricks" campaign to murder anti-apartheid activists; that research
on organophosphates and cancer-inducing agents was carried out, and even
President Mandela was considered a target.

It is hoped that the current investigations by the Office for Serious
Economic Offences, along with evidence presented to or gathered by the
Commission, will shed light on these and other cases of poisoning and
chemical warfare, outlawed in international law.


4.8 Apartheid and the destabilisation of Southern African countries in
the 1980s


What the apartheid government called "Total Strategy" at home had its
counterpart of "destabilisation" in neighbouring countries. In 1989 a
Commonwealth report described this as having reached "holocaust"
proportions. The report added that at that time the human cost was
1,500,000 dead through military and economic action, most of them
children, while a further four million had been displaced from their
homes. The economic cost to the six Frontline States was estimated to
exceed 45 billion US dollars, not to mention the destruction of
agriculture, industry, education and health care in countries like
Mozambique and Angola.

Amongst the external destabilisation methods used by the apartheid state
were the following:

* Armed action, ranging from sporadic commando raids into several
  neighbouring countries, to full-scale invasion as occurred in Angola
* Hit squad raids to abduct or assassinate political opponents, usually
  people connected to the ANC
* The promotion, backing or even creation of surrogate anti-government
  forces through logistical support, intelligence and training as in
  Mozambique and Angola
* Political pressures to promote the instalment of governments well
  disposed towards apartheid South Africa
* Economic pressures to create and maintain dependency on South African
  transport, harbour, custom and financial systems.

The reverberations of this past are still being felt today, as in the
recurrent conflicts in Angola and the results of poverty caused by
shattered economic infrastructures in neighbouring states.

The conflict in Mozambique, was portrayed as a "civil war" between the
Frelimo government and an indigenous "anti-communist resistance movement"
by the apartheid regime. In fact, the conflict was a low intensity covert
war waged by Pretoria through a surrogate force, which served as a pilot
project for similar operations against other neighbouring states. The
experience of utilising surrogate forces in neighbouring countries
influenced and informed similar tactics in South Africa such as Operation
Marion. The domestic equivalent of calling covert aggression against
neighbouring states "civil war" was to describe vigilante assaults on
anti-apartheid activists as "black-on-black violence".

In both cases the role of the apartheid state was concealed; the
deployment of force was cheap both in terms of security force casualties
and resources; and the level of violence and brutality could be raised at
a lower diplomatic and political cost than would have been the case if
the regular armed forces of the state had been directly involved.

The Commission for Truth and Reconciliation is the first official inquiry
into human rights abuses whose mandate covers events that occurred inside
as well as outside the borders of South Africa. It is, therefore,
imperative that the research and investigation arms of the TRC document
in detail the full extent of South African destabilisation of the
sub-continent during the apartheid years.

In addition, the ANC requests that:

* all murders of ANC cadres and leaders in neighbouring countries are
  listed;
* that those who authorised and carried out these killings are
  identified;
* that official documents referring to these operations of the
  apartheid state are made available.

Case study: Mozambique - questions requiring clarification:

We know that the former government supported Renamo's campaign in
Mozambique. Former Foreign Minister, Pik Botha, admitted in parliament on
April 24 1985 (see Hansard column 4214) that such support was provided at
least until the signing of the Nkomati Accord.

Information that emerged over the years suggested that this support was
co-ordinated by the Department of Special Tasks 2 (DST 2) of the
Chief-of-Staff-Intelligence of the SADF, through an operation codenamed
"Mila". DST 2 was said to have operated out of the Zanza building in
Proes Street, Pretoria and to have been commanded by Colonel Cornelius
Johannes van Niekerk. Van Niekerk reported to Colonel Cornelius Jacobus
van Tonder. Both men are among the accused in the current trial of Magnus
Malan and others. Roland Hunter was jailed for exposing SADF support for
Renamo, including the payment of salaries to Renamo members, the supply
of weapons and the issuing of operational orders. Given this close
involvement, and the many horrific atrocities committed against civilians
by Renamo during the war in Mozambique, we need to know: who authorised
this support and when; what, if any, were the orders given in relation to
the conduct expected from those who took part in the operations

The Gorongosa documents captured at Renamo headquarters in August 1985,
the authenticity has never been denied, indicated that the SADF continued
to supply weapons and provide support to Renamo even after the signing of
the Nkomati Accord.

Among those specifically named in the Gorongosa documents as being
involved in these activities after the signing of the Accord, in which
the South African government committed itself to refraining from such
activities, were Generals Constand Viljoen, Jannie Geldenhuys, P.J. van
der Westhuizen, Kat Liebenberg, Colonels van Tonder, van Niekerk and
Greyling, and a Major Phillips (who worked with Renamo in Malawi.) Who
authorised this continued support for Renamo in violation of the Nkomati
Accord? And since the Gorongosa documents belie claims that this support
ended in March 1984, when, in fact, did such support for Renamo end?

There have been numerous eyewitness accounts of airdrops, sea-borne
landings of arms and equipment, and the use of specialist saboteur teams
to support Renamo operations, notably during a push in mid-1987 which
resulted in the massacres of many hundreds of civilians at Homoine and
Manjacaze in particularly brutal incidents. It is important to establish
what role, if any, the SADF played in supporting these particular
actions, and on whose orders they acted.

The Matola raid in January 1981 was the first of a series of attacks on
residences dubbed "ANC bases". This raid and others (in Mozambique and
elsewhere) were characterised by a "shoot first, and cover up afterwards"
approach, in which the aim appears to have been to kill everyone in the
vicinity regardless of who they may have been. Since this modus operandi
also applied to numerous operations inside South Africa, it is important
to know what operational orders were given in these raids, by whom, and
what rules of engagement, if any, applied.

It appears that raiders became indifferent as to whether they actually
struck an ANC residence or a neighbour's house, possibly to deliberately
heighten tensions between the ANC and the host community. An example of
innocent bystanders caught in such raids was the case of the Pateguane
family: the parents were murdered in Maputo in 1988 in front of their
children (who are now being cared for by Luis Bernado Honwana, the UNESCO
representative in Johannesburg) when an SADF commando unit apparently
went to the wrong flat. Who was responsible for the murder of the
Pateguanes? What operational orders with regard to the avoidance of
civilian casualties were in force?

The apartheid state embarked on a concerted drive to murder as many
ANC-linked personnel as possible in neighbouring countries as well as in
South Africa. We call on the Commission to establish who gave the orders
for this assassination campaign, the circumstances of each individual
case, how targets were selected, and who was in operational command of
such attacks.

The cause of the plane crash in which President Samora Machel and members
of his entourage were killed in October 1986 has still not been
determined to everyone's satisfaction. Allegations were made at the time
that the plane had been diverted off course by a "false beam" device in
South Africa. This matter was not resolved by the tri-partite official
inquiry. The Mozambican government demanded that the investigating team
continue its investigation to establish the source of the signal to which
the plane responded, diverting it from its course, but this was refused
by the South African authorities at the time. It is in the interests of
the people of South Africa and Mozambique that the facts of this incident
are established.

We have selected Mozambique as a case study but the same pattern of
destabilisation, though taking different forms and in various degrees of
intensity, occurred in other neighbouring states: Swaziland, Lesotho,
Angola, Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana.

What role was played in these campaigns by other government departments
not directly tasked with armed actions?

In an SABC television interview former Minister of Foreign Affairs Pik
Botha responded to questions about a raid in Swaziland in December 1986,
in which a 13-year-old Swazi child was killed, as follows:

Question:
        Did you know beforehand that the raid would take place?
Botha:
        Yes.
Question:
        And you approved it?
Botha:
        Yes, I accept full responsibility together with my colleagues.
Question:
        Do you now regret that it happened?
Botha:
        I do not regret it. If the decision were to be made again, I
        would make the same decision, together with my colleagues

The above questions clearly only deal with a fragment of the overall
history of the apartheid regime's external destabilisation strategy.
These are the kinds of questions we hope the TRC will ask, and answer,
about the full range of cross-border destabilisation activities conducted
between the early 1960s and 1993.


4.9 Covert action and state sanctioned gross violations of human rights
in the negotiations era of the 1990s


State terrorism and covert operations did not end with the historic
unbanning of the ANC and other organisations in 1990. Nor did they end
once the formal commencement of negotiations for a new constitution had
begun. While the ANC formally suspended armed actions in July 1990, the
state covertly pursued a campaign of violence of unprecedented
proportions which exploded on the Reef in August 1990. All the hallmarks
of "total strategy", were in eveidence combined with deliberate
destabilisation, or Low-Intensity Warfare tactics, including intense
propaganda campaigns - the same set of ideas or principles to be employed
in efforts to defeat left-wing insurgents and national liberation
movements in various parts of the world, and which the regime itself had
used particularly in Mozambique. The violence against civilians in the
post-1990 phase - during the so-called "peaceful transition" to democracy
- was infinitely worse than anything experienced during the height of
repression in the Emergency years of the mid-1980s.

A top secret document concerning plans to change the accounting
procedures governing "sensitive defence activities" funded through the
Special Defence Account, dated 13/03/90, was sent in March 1990 by the
Chief of the Defence Force, General Jannie Geldenhuys, to the Minister of
Defence, Magnus Malan; the document was co-signed by the Minister of
Finance Barend du Plessis. It is stated in this memo that FW de Klerk was
"briefed on a broad spectrum of sensitive projects" and had given his
approval "in principle" on "the running of stratkom projects"; he had
proposed establishing a central controlling body for such operations.
This document also states that "covert stratkom projects are controlled
and managed by the Secretary of the SSC. This includes the separation and
allocation of areas to Departments. The Secretary of the SSC receives
decisions and orders in this regard from the State President and passes
them on to the departments concerned." Project Marion was one of over
forty covert projects being funded at this time from the Special Defence
Account.

According to the Department of Defence, Project Kampong was managed by
Military Intelligence until 01/04/1991, when it was taken over by the SA
Army. These specific projects were only terminated at the end of October
1992; in the 1991/2 book year alone, over R21,5-million was covertly
spent on these projects, aimed at countering the ANC. By this time it is
believed that AEC had spent over R150-million and that various regional
fronts would continue to be funded at an additional cost of R20-million
until 1994. There is little doubt that other covert operations besides
these also continued .

The violence was a calculated campaign with the objective of creating
conditions which would assist the regime in weakening the hand of the
liberation movement at the negotiations table, thereby manipulating the
constitutional negotiations process to its advantage on various levels -
in other words, an attempt to "manage" the transition to the advantage of
the state. This so-called "senseless" violence against black civilians,
often with no obvious political connections at all, exhibited certain
operational features previously unknown in the country (particularly
Renamo style violence on trains, drive-by shootings and massed attacks on
township residents from hostels which had been deliberately converted
into informal military barracks). This terror campaign against black
civilians was ascribed to "political intolerance", in much the same way
that covertly directed violence was deliberately portrayed as
"black-on-black" violence in the 1980s.

Operations included a variety of actions aimed at influencing the
perceptions of the ANC leadership, keeping the leadership under maximum
pressure by extending ANC resources to breaking point, preventing mass
action, and creating covers for assassinations. Other operations had the
objective of dividing, weakening and destroying the organisational
capacity and the image of the ANC and its Alliance partners on all
possible levels through the destabilisation of their support base,
propaganda portraying the ANC as being the main instigator of violence,
the assassination of key leaders, and so on.

Former SAP operative Paul Erasmus has stated that his unit was told
during their 1990 stratkom training that a key objective was to reduce
the ANC to "just another political party" by 1994. Apart from a range of
other actions designed to achieve this objective, using violence to
project Inkatha as formidable political player, on a par with the ANC,was
a critically important aspect of this campaign. Inkatha supporters were
cynically used as the cutting edge of the NP's constitutional agenda,
which was aimed not only at destabilising and weakening the ANC, but also
at maintaining control of the negotiations process and producing a
settlement that would have a semblance of change, but would leave the
essence of the apartheid system intact.

These campaigns resulted in unprecedented bloodshed and misery, far worse
than anything experienced at the height of state-sponsored violence in
the Emergency years. As the ANC pointed out after the Boipatong Massacre,
in the few short years in which De Klerk had been in power, more
civilians had been murdered than in all the previous decades of apartheid
rule.

Between July 1990 and the end of 1993, over 12,000 civilians were killed
and at least 20,000 were injured in thousands of incidents, including
scores of major massacres. Many were women and children - for example,
between July 1992 and June 1993, 253 women and 58 children were killed,
and 315 women and 211 children were injured; in the case of the Boipatong
massacre, no fewer than 25 of the 46 dead were women and children,
described by the Human Rights Commission in 1993 as "a clear example of
deliberate intent." The Human Rights Commission also recorded the
accelerating pace of assassinations of anti-apartheid figures: 28 in
1990, to 60 in 1991, and 97 in 1992.

To date there have been partial yet telling revelations of the nature and
extent of covert operations in the post 1990-phase. To give just a few
key examples drawn from many cases, there was the "Inkathagate" expose in
1991, which brought to light the ongoing covert funding of Inkatha by the
De Klerk regime, with one of the key objectives being to prevent the
Inkatha leadership "throwing in their lot" with the ANC.

In 1991, disaffected Military Intelligence communications expert Nico
Basson alleged he had been part of a wide-ranging covert operation aimed
at preventing SWAPO achieving the two-thirds majority necessary to draft
the Namibian constitution alone; in addition, Basson claimed, Operation
Agree included components designed to covertly manipulate the outcomes of
the transitions to democracy in Angola and South Africa. Subsequent
events appear to support these allegations, which should be the subject
of intensive investigation by the Commission.

The Orde Boerevolk provides another key example. After their escape to
the UK, "hunger strikers" Henry Martin and Adriaan Maritz revealed that
far from being radical white right-wingers, they were in fact working as
agents of the Department of Military Intelligence with the specific brief
of destabilising black communities in general and the ANC in particular:
they had been responsible for the murder of Nick Cruise, an ANC-aligned
computer technician, and the explosion of a bomb at a taxi rank in which
many civilians had been injured. It is a matter of public record that one
of the guns stolen by Orde Boerevolk leader "Pit Skiet" Rudolph in 1990
was used to murder Chris Hani. There have been press reports indicating
that there are grounds for suspicion that Janus Waluz, convicted of this
murder, was in some way linked to this network.

We call on the Commission to reopen investigations into the murder of
Chris Hani, in the light of information which was not available at the
time of the assassination, and which could come to light in the course of
the hearings of the Commission or through applications for amnesty.

Agents posing as right-wingers connected to the Orde Boerevolk continued
operations until the 1994 elections, the strategy being to absolve their
handlers from certain heinous actions during a period in which the regime
had committed itself to negotiations, and to exaggerate perceptions of
the threat from the white and black extreme right in order to extract
constitutional concessions from the ANC.

The November 1992 raid by the Goldstone Commission on Pan Afrik
Industrial Investment Consultants (PAIIC), a front run by the
Directorate: Covert Collection, succeeded in providing partial glimpses
of other operations, such as those aimed at subverting Self-Defence
Units, possibly falling under a more extensive operation code-named
Project Echoes. Several senior DMI officers were suspended in the wake of
this raid, and subsequent court action by one of them, Jan Anton
Nieuwoudt, indicated that the Directorate: Covert Collection, and PAIIC,
may have been involved in a range of covert actions considered crucial to
the strategy of the De Klerk regime during the negotiations phase. It may
also have taken over many functions of the CCB, including operations
beyond the borders of South Africa. We call on the Commission to ensure
that the nature and full extent of operations conducted behind the cover
of this front are brought to light.

The final Goldstone Commission report referred to a "horrible network of
criminal activity" involving SAP officials and elements within Inkatha
and the KZP, and led to the suspension of top SAP officials. The trial of
Eugene de Kock is beginning to shed more light on operations of this
nature, which included the deliberate flooding of the country with arms,
a grossly irresponsible tactic which has had a severe impact on the crime
and security situation in the country to this day.

The ANC feels it is not reasonable to believe that extensive operations
of this nature - which were all in line with the overall strategic
objectives of the De Klerk administration - could take place without the
knowledge of key officials at the highest level of the security and
intelligence services, as well as the civilian administration, including
those officials tasked with steering the negotiations process.

4.9.1 The vehicle: The National Co-ordinating Mechanism (NCM)

In 1990 the name of the NSMS was changed to the National Co-ordinating
Mechanism (NCM). There have been attempts to propagate the idea that De
Klerk abolished the NSMS; that it was stripped of its security and
intelligence components, and became no more than an essential and benign
co-ordinating structure. This is untrue, as even a cursory reading of the
official Handleiding: Nasionale Koordineringsmeganisme (Manual: National
Co-ordinating Mechanism) shows. In essence, the NCM remained the old
NSMS. The security committees (veikoms) chaired by SAP or SADF officers
from local to national level remained in place: as the official manual
notes, "the principle of the application of the full powers of the state
in order to resist the revolutionary onslaught is still valid" (p. 22).
The NCM remained the vehicle for co-ordinating state action on political
and other fronts, and structures tasked with strategic communications
work remained in place at the highest levels of the NCM.

One of the most important structures within the "new" NCM was the
Security Secretariat. According to the official Handbook, this structure
replaced the former Secretariat of the State Security Council, and was
"structurally integrated into the NIS". It had three branches:
Administrative Support, Strategy, and Strategic Communication. Among the
functions listed for this Secretariat is "the co-ordination of strategic
communication", and "strategic documentation: remark: the functional
responsibility for the strategic and stratkom functions remain with the
line functionaries." The Security Secretariat was represented on both the
Joint Security Staff and the Security Committee, on which more detail
appears below; and it also liaised with the State Security Council and
the Cabinet Committee for Security Affairs.

A new structure called the Security Committee (national level) was
established to replace the National Joint Management Centre (NJMC) and
other committees, and was responsible for the "co-ordination of all
security matters at national level, as well as reporting to the State
Security Council (SSC) and the Cabinet Committee for Security Affairs."
In 1990 the Security Committee had nine members: Neil Barnard
(Director-General of NIS) as chair, an unspecified representative of the
SADF (probably the Chief of the SADF), the Commissioner of Police, the
Directors-General of the Departments of Constitutional Development,
Justice, Foreign Affairs, the Director-General of the Office of the State
President, a secretary from the National Intelligence Service (NIS), and
the chief of the Security Secretariat.

One of the task groups retained from the NSMS was the Joint Security
Staff (JSS), described as the "operational executive co-ordinator of the
Security community". The JSS was responsible for "the co-ordination of
the planning, execution and monitoring of all joint security actions on
national level, and ensuring that this takes place on regional and local
levels"; among other duties with which the JSS was tasked was "the
handling of Administration Total War (the State War Book.)" According to
the NCM Handbook, this key structure was responsible only to the Security
Committee, and also liaised with the Security Secretariat, other
"interdepartmental security task groups", and with the Joint and Local
Co-ordinating Centres (the re-named Sub, and Mini-JMC's) lower down the
NCM hierarchy. In 1990 the JSS was chaired alternatively by the chief of
the SAP Operations branch and the SADF's Chief-of-Staff: Operations, and
by April 1992 the Chief of the highly controversial, semi-autonomous
Internal Stability Division (the re-named Riot Squad) took over as chair.

The official NCM handbook gives considerable detail for the procedure
governing these "full meetings", which highlights the leading role played
by the Security Secretariat, which was "structurally integrated into the
NIS":

"The meeting is opened by a security briefing by the Security Secretariat
and is (where necessary) supplemented by the other members; the need for
joint actions are identified and the relevant functionary is tasked with
the implementation; reporting on the functioning of the system (the NCM)
on regional and local levels is done by the Executive; possible reports
and/or recommendations to the Security Committee are considered."

By the end of April 1992, as the government and the ANC were gearing up
for the next round of negotiations in Codesa II, the so-called Third
Force had spread a trail of blood and terror through many Reef townships.
On April 23rd, 1992, a milestone judgement was delivered in the Trust
Feeds massacre trial: SAP Captain Brian Mitchell, who had been the head
of the local JMC at the time of the 1988 massacre of eleven people, was
convicted of murder along with four "kitskonstabels." On the same day, De
Klerk stated in Parliament that the NIS, SAP and SADF had "terminated all
special secret projects and were confining themselves only to the line
function tasks entrusted to them by law"; he added that control was
exercised over all secret projects by a Cabinet Committee, chaired by
Barend Du Plessis, which "exercises control over the content of every
special secret project, and overall control over covert expenditure in
general." Barend du Plessis resigned two days later as Minister of
Finance, Transvaal leader of the NP, and as MP for Florida.

In the wake of former SAP official Paul Erasmus's later revelations
regarding the running of covert stratkom projects during the negotiations
phase, the NP has admitted that Gerrit Viljoen and Kobie Coetsee were
also members of this committee. This Committee cannot escape
responsibility for their role in (at least) giving policy guidelines for
special stratkom projects - their "control over the content" of such
projects, to use De Klerk's words.

In what was titled a Study Brief, dated 23rd April 1992, which was sent
to Military Intelligence structures (and presumably to other arms of the
security and intelligence services), recipients were informed that the
Cabinet had decided (as of November 1991) to transfer responsibility for
the management and administration of the National Co-ordinating Mechanism
from the Cabinet Secretariat (formerly called the Welfare Secretariat) to
the Department of Regional and Land Affairs, to which the Deputy Minister
of Law and Order, Johan Scheepers, had been shifted. The provincial
administrations, under the guidance of a structure called the NCM
Secretariat which had been created by this time, were to take over the
running of the 10 Joint Co-ordinating Centres. There were changes in
other key structures, particularly the Joint Security Staff. The chair
had been the SAP head of the Operational Branch, and was now replaced by
Lt-General Johan Swart, the Chief of the Internal Stability Division (the
Riot Squad was renamed the ISD at this time, in April 1992). Other
permanent members of this key Task Group were the Chief of the Army (who
acted as Deputy Chair), two representatives of the SAP's Unrest Control
and Prevention unit, a representative from the CIS (the re-named Security
Branch), and other officials, including a representative of the "Chief
Directorate Welfare Administration (NCM Secretariat.)"

What this information highlights is the need to examine closely the
complex manner in which the former De Klerk administration attempted to
manage change, and the role played by a range of state structures, not
only the security forces.

Certain elements within the National Party government realised that their
destabilisation campaign was becoming counter-productive, or feared that
the real risk of the truth being exposed would carry unacceptably high
political costs. However, powerful elements within senior government
structures believed it should continue. What one observer described as
"the mother of all covert operations" continued until South Africa's
first democratic government, elected in April 1994, began to assert its
authority. Despite this, the "total onslaught" dirty tricks campaigns
launched by the apartheid state during the 1980s and 1990s continue to
impact directly on the day-to-day situation in South Africa, particularly
in the province of KwaZulu/Natal.

To cite just two further examples of this nature, Dr Johan van der
Westhuizen, who set up Adult Education Consultants with Louis Pasques,
re-emerged in January 1994 as one of the founders of the African
Christian Democratic Party (ACDP). Louis Pasques himself received
lucrative contracts from the De Klerk government's Nutritional
Development Programme, and by 1992 he had set up new consultancies, one
of which purported to offer communication skills and training in "nation
building" to governments in neighbouring states.

These concerns are more than a matter of passing interest but have direct
relevance to the security of the democratic order today. Many of the
operatives in such covert structures as AEC, the CCB, Vlakplaas and
others were not only given golden handshakes, but "disappeared" with the
infrastructure responsible for the violence in the post-1990 period.

The Goldstone Commission was told that AEC's Creed Consultants was
"privatising" its operations. It is strongly suspected that some of them
are still in operation in KwaZulu/Natal; others are part of the criminal
network; yet others are involved in taxi violence. Part of this network,
which included journalists and "agents of influence" in a range of
organisations and institutions, is most certainly still in operation;
some of them continue to serve the interests of their previous masters,
and it cannot be ruled out that others may be activated at some time in
the future.

There are a few key political officials, operatives and commanders who
know exactly how these networks functioned, and who can provide
information on how extensive it was, on what has happened to it; and what
capacity it still has for destabilisation. We urge the Commission to
invite these individuals to give evidence on this grave matter. But above
all, FW de Klerk has the responsibility to inform the nation about the
activities of the covert repressive machinery that he headed when he took
over from PW Botha.

The process of reconciliation requires answers about the activities not
only of the State Security Council, but also all key structures falling
immediately under it in the NSMS and NCM hierarchies.

We call on the Truth Commission to examine the minutes and other relevant
records of all these structures from the time of their inception.

In the pre-1990 phase, key structures included the Working Group of the
SSC, the Secretariat of the SSC with its Strategic Communications and
other sub-committees, the Inter-Departmental Committees, the sectors in
every government department tasked with stratkom work, the National Joint
Management Centre, and the Joint Management Centres.

In the post-1990 NCM, key structures resorting under the SSC included the
Cabinet Committee for Security Affairs, the Security Committee (national
level), the Security Secretariat (and each of its sub-committees tasked
with Strategy, Administration and Strategic Communications), the Joint
Security Staff, and all sectors within the security and intelligence
services, as well as civilian government departments, which were
specifically tasked with covert operations and stratkom work.

We call on the Commission to determine who was responsible for developing
guidelines which were implemented by these structures, and all other
units tasked with operations geared towards manipulating the negotiations
process in the favour of the NP. The Constitutional Development Service
formed an important node of power in this regard, and was headed by
former senior NIS officials. What role was played by the pre-eminent
secret NP think-tank on strategic issues, the Afrikaner Broederbond?


===========================================================================



5. The ANC: Stages of Struggle and Policy Foundations, 1960-1994



5.1 New forms of struggle after Sharpeville and the banning of democratic
opposition (1960-69)


The African National Congress announced its adoption of armed struggle on
December 16 1961. It is relevant to quote from the flyer distributed on
that day, issued by Umkhonto we Sizwe, announcing that sabotage attacks
had been carried out:

"Umkhonto we Sizwe will carry on the struggle for freedom and democracy
by new methods, which are necessary to complement the actions of the
established national liberation organisations. Umkhonto we Sizwe fully
supports the national liberation movement, and our members, jointly and
individually, place themselves under the overall political guidance of
that movement.

It is, however, well known that the main national liberation
organisations in this country have consistently followed a policy of
non-violence. They have conducted themselves peaceably at all times...But
the people's patience is not endless.

The time comes in the life of any nation when there remain only two
choices: submit or fight. That time has now come to South Africa. We
shall not submit and we have no choice but to hit back by all means
within our power in defence of our people, our future and our freedom.

The government has interpreted the peacefulness of the movement as
weakness; the people's non-violent policies have been taken as a green
light for government violence. Refusal to resort to force has been
interpreted by the government as an invitation to use armed force against
the people without any fear of reprisals. The methods of Umkhonto we
Sizwe mark a break with that past..."

The manifesto explained that armed activity was necessary because of the
ways in which legislation during the 1950s and especially since March
1960 had curtailed the legal space for non-violent, extra-parliamentary
political protest. The manifesto held that within the previous eighteen
months "virtual martial law" had been imposed: the reference was to the
State of Emergency of March-August 1960 and the massive show of force in
May 1961 against ANC efforts to organise a general strike. It asserted
moral legitimacy for the resort to violence on the grounds of necessary
defence: "The choice is not ours; it has been made by the Nationalist
government."

Significantly, the ANC was not the only organisation to conclude that the
only choices were to submit or fight. Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK) was preceded
by a Committee for National Liberation, subsequently calling itself the
African Resistance Movement, which included members of the Liberal Party
as well as individuals from splinter socialist groupings. The PAC
launched Poqo. There were also attempts to set up armed units by elements
which had broken away from the Unity Movement.

The Umkhonto we Sizwe manifesto, characterised by one scholar as "one of
the most eloquent assertions of revolutionary morality in the period
after the Second World War", was firmly grounded in the historical
realities of the day. The National Party government had drastically
narrowed the arena of legal political activity available to the ANC; and
then closed it by banning the organisation in April 1960. The use of
police and army troops in May 1961 to defeat the planned national
stay-away further emphasised that the politics of the 1950s -
characterised by campaigns of non-violent mass mobilisation - would no
longer be tolerated by the state. The impatience and mounting anger of
many rank-and-file members of the ANC, particularly among the youth,
exerted further pressure on the ANC leadership to turn to armed activity.

This statement by President OR Tambo, which makes it clear that the ANC
was not only reacting to the closure of peaceful forms of demonstration
but was also concerned to prevent undirected forms of mass violence, is
relevant:

"Umkhonto we Sizwe was founded...in order to give coherence to the
spontaneous revolutionary violence our people were beginning to assert in
response to the repressive violence of the apartheid state. During the
late 1950s, there had already been a number of armed uprisings in various
parts of the country as the oppressed fought back to claim their rights,
which were being ruthlessly suppressed by the Verwoerd regime. In the
Northern Transvaal the peasants had risen against the imposition of the
Bantustan system. In the Western Transvaal the rising of the peasants had
been suppressed with great violence. (...) In the Transkei the imposition
of the bantustan system had provoked the most sustained peasant uprising
in six decades, and in many portions of that region the rule of the
puppet chiefs and the regime had been superseded by popularly elected
peasants committees. The struggle in the urban areas had also reached a
high-water mark The massacres at Sharpeville and Langa in 1960, the
slaughter of a peasant demonstration at Ngquza Hill in Pondoland in
1960..."

A statement issued by the NEC in 1963 explicitly referred to methods of
struggle at that time, and warned of the dangers of believing that
freedom could be achieved by "plunging the country into riots and
terrorist acts":

"Some (spontaneous actions of the people) result from Government
provocation, the people's patience becomes exhausted, and the masses
become desperate in the absence of a strong militant organisation. In
these circumstances people are likely to resort more and more to
senseless and dangerous forms of action. If we embark on unplanned and
misguided political actions, we are playing into the hands of the enemy."

When MK was launched, its activities took the form of sabotage attacks on
government installations, police stations, electric pylons and similar
targets. At the same time, a different form of armed struggle was
envisaged: rural-based guerrilla war. This was spelled out in Operation
Mayibuye, a draft under discussion in the National High Command of MK. It
envisaged guerrilla struggle being "sparked off" by military operations
carried out by small groups of combatants, professionally trained outside
South Africa. It was envisaged that such operations would serve to
recruit thousands of internal auxiliaries. Attacks on strategic state
targets would be complemented by urban sabotage and political agitation.

From the very beginning, Umkhonto we Sizwe emphasised that armed actions
took place within a broader political context. Not only did this apply to
the need for cadres to fully understand the basic policy positions of the
ANC - the first port of call in all military training - but they were
also taught to ensure that the moral high ground occupied by the
liberation movement due to the justness of the cause must be maintained
in the actual theatre of battle, in the choice of targets, attitude to
civilians, and treatment of captives.

However, during all stages of the armed struggle, the ANC had to
constantly contend with the tension between two tendencies: a strict
adherence to these policies, and taking the easiest route of terrorist
attacks against white civilians. It also had to assess the extent of
public anger and the spontaneous actions by groups not falling under its
discipline, and ensure that the anger of the people was channelled in
such a way that it served the long-term political objective of attaining
a democratic and non-racial society. Within its own ranks, debate on
these issues would rage unceasingly, especially following the many brutal
actions by the regime against unarmed civilians. The temptation to resort
to indiscriminate attacks was always there: but at all times, the
principled approach of the movement would prevail.

The arrests at Rivonia, and subsequent trials, ended the first phase of
MK activity - the sabotage campaign between December 1961 and mid-1963.
By mid-1965, not only MK but also the ANC had effectively been destroyed
within South Africa. It was to be another eight years before there was
significant reconstruction of an ANC underground, and eleven years before
the resumption of armed activity inside South Africa. Immediately
following this period, the major involvement of MK in armed activity took
the form of a joint operation with ZAPU forces in then Rhodesia. The
Wankie and Sipolilo Campaigns (1967-8) failed in their major objectives -
to open a trail back into the country - but provided important lessons to
the movement.

They also led to the new programme, Strategy and Tactics of the ANC,
adopted at the Morogoro conference of 1969. This document, accepted the
need for a protracted armed struggle before the "conquest of power" in
South Africa by the ANC. Crucially, it asserted that successful
development of armed struggle depended upon political mobilisation, an
important precursor to theories of "people's war" developed during the
early 1980s within the ANC.

In the 1980s the overall approach of the ANC was summed up in what was
called the "Four Pillars" of struggle: mass mobilisation, armed
operations, underground organisation and international solidarity work.

The circumstances which led to the ANC's decision to launch Umkhonto we
Sizwe have been sketched broadly above.

With more specific reference to the ANC's approach to the role of armed
actions in the struggle for democracy, and which targets it considered
legitimate, two continuous threads in all ANC policies and public
statements on this issue have been that armed struggle is only one of a
range of inter-related methods of struggle, with the political leadership
at all times directing armed struggle; secondly, armed struggle would be
waged in order to bring peace to the country: the apartheid regime had to
be stopped, as quickly and effectively as possible, as it was bent on a
path which would only result in racial war.

The MK Manifesto states:

"We of Umkhonto we Sizwe have always sought - as the liberation movement
has sought - to achieve liberation without bloodshed and civil clash. We
do so still. We hope - even at this late hour - that our first actions
will awaken everyone to the disastrous situation to which the Nationalist
policy is leading. We hope that we will bring the Government and its
supporters to their senses before it is too late, so that both Government
and its policies can be changed before matters reach the desperate stage
of civil war. We believe our actions to be a blow against the nationalist
preparations for civil war and military rule."

The same point was made by Nelson Mandela, first Commander-in-Chief of
MK, during his trial in 1962:

"Government violence can do only one thing and that is to breed
counter-violence. We have warned repeatedly that the Government, by
resorting continually to violence will breed in this country
counter-violence among the people, till ultimately, if there is no
dawning of sanity on the part of the Government, ultimately the dispute
between the Government and my people will finish up being settled by
violence and force."

As outlined above, preparations were made for the possible adoption of
guerrilla warfare should the sabotage campaign fail in its objective,
which was to get the government of the day to agree to negotiations in a
National Convention. As Nelson Mandela put it in his 1964 statement from
the dock, the leadership at that time believed four forms of violence
were possible: "there is sabotage, there is guerrilla warfare, there is
terrorism, and there is open revolution." Sabotage was the first choice
of MK as it did not involve loss of life, and would cause the least
bitterness and division to develop among people. However, the leadership
of Umkhonto assessed white response to their sabotage campaign with
anxiety: "The whites and blacks were moving into separate camps, and the
prospects of avoiding a civil war were made less."

The draft document, Operation Mayibuye, made explicit reference to
targets considered legitimate in Part V, titled "Detailed Plan of
Implementation". It was envisaged that various departments be set up with
detailed terms of reference to submit plans to launch guerrilla warfare.
The terms of reference for the Intelligence Department include the
following sub-section:


"(e) Selection of targets to be tackled in initial phase of guerrilla
operations with a view to causing maximum damage to the enemy as well as
preventing quick deployment of reinforcements. In its study the Committee
should bear in mind the following main targets:

1. Strategic road, railways and other communications.
2. power stations
3. police stations, camps and military forces
4. irredeemable Government stooges."


As will be shown in the rest of this submission, this basic approach did
not change over the years, even under extreme provocation.


5.2 A Changing Scenario and New Challenges (1969-79)


The Strategy and Tactics document adopted at the 1969 Morogoro Conference
was the first comprehensive strategic guideline for the ANC in the period
of armed struggle. A decision was made to shift the ANC's approach from
sending armed groups of cadres into the country to "spark off" guerrilla
warfare, and instead emphasised that a period of political reconstruction
of the ANC inside the country was necessary, as this would provide the
only secure base for successful military organisation. It was necessary
to first extend and consolidate an ANC underground machinery and to
generally mobilise the people, especially the black working population,
into active mass struggle around both local and national issues. Military
struggle was seen as forming only part of, and being guided by, a broader
political strategy to ensure that the battle against apartheid was fought
on all possible fronts, involving not just an army but all those
oppressed by apartheid:

"When we talk of revolutionary armed struggle, we are talking of
political struggle by means which include the use of military force (...)
It is important to emphasise this because our movement must reject all
manifestations of militarism which separates armed people's struggle from
its political context. Reference has already been made to the danger of
the thesis which regards the creation of military areas as the generator
of mass resistance."

On the question of the relationship between the political and the
military, it was noted that from the very beginning: "our Movement has
brooked no ambiguity concerning this. The primacy of the political
leadership is unchallenged and supreme and all revolutionary formation
and levels (whether armed or not) are subordinate to this leadership."
(Strategy and Tactics, 1969.)

The perspective guiding the ANC at this time was that of classic
guerrilla warfare, concentrated mainly in the rural areas, as this was
where the enemy's military structures were weakest; targets would include
military bases, command posts and personnel.

Decisions taken at the Morogoro Conference resulted in changes to
political and military structures. A new Revolutionary Council was
formed. Over the next few years, the ANC began to implement some of the
Morogoro recommendations. Procedures were set up to facilitate liaison
between leadership and the rank and file, and the arduous task of
infiltrating cadres back into the country and setting up a rudimentary
underground organisation began.

Such re-entry was painfully difficult in the first half of the 1970s. The
key problem was the absence of internal support structures for cadres
attempting to infiltrate the country, there were no reception facilities
for guerrillas, or reliable underground structures, whereas the state
could call on a vast army of security personnel, government officials and
informers.

By the middle of the decade, several factors tilted the advantage towards
the ANC. Firstly, a new combativeness established itself amongst the
people with the rise of Black Consciousness and the new independent trade
unions. Secondly, the accession to power of MPLA in Angola and Frelimo in
Mozambique shifted the regional balance of power. Thirdly, senior ANC
organisers who had completed prison sentences began to rebuild ANC units
in major urban centres. Fourthly, the centre of gravity of the exiled
movement shifted to countries bordering on South Africa.

Again, in this period, when the movement was facing many difficulties in
rooting its underground within the country, resisting the temptation to
spread such structures and armed actions in an opportunistic fashion was
a difficult challenge. One instance of this was when contact was made
with members of the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM), when a delegation
of BCM leaders met with the ANC in the mid-1970s. They had come to
appreciate the futility of student protest on its own as a means to
liberate the country, and were seeking assistance to undertake armed
actions.

Their submission was that they needed military training, and should then
be allowed to operate independently within the country, with their own
command structures. Given the difficulties the ANC experienced at this
time, this was like a godsend. But the movement asserted its political
position: that the politics of non-racialism and national liberation
should guide whatever armed actions were undertaken, and that the
politics of the ANC should guide whoever carried out operations on the
basis of its training and supplies.

It was as a result of this interaction, over a long period, that the
senior corps of BCM leadership started to co-ordinate their work with the
ANC, and some of them became fully-fledged members of the underground.
The brutality against Steve Biko in detention, leading to his murder in
1977, can partly be explained by the fact that he had made moves towards
contact with the ANC, and was on the verge of a historic meeting with OR
Tambo. Carl Edwards and Craig Williamson knew of the link between the ANC
and Biko, and they are most likely to be responsible for his betrayal.
But the murderers themselves should know better, and they should shed
light on this matter before this Commission.

When Soweto erupted in 1976, thousands of young militants left the
country and gravitated towards the ANC. Not only did the External Mission
of the ANC double and redouble its membership; it also received one of
the most precious assets that any exile force can receive - fresh links
with organisations and individuals within the country.

During the years from 1976-1979 there was a marked escalation in armed
actions: railway lines were sabotaged in many parts of the country,
police stations in Soweto, Germiston and Daveyton were attacked, and
Bantu Administration offices in Port Elizabeth were bombed. A number of
notorious security police were executed, and for the first time battles
between MK units and the police took place: the battle was slowly but
surely being taken to the enemy. About 37 armed actions took place
between the 1976 youth uprising and the end of 1978.

At that point - December 1978 - the ANC's National Executive Committee
and Revolutionary Council held an important meeting in Luanda.
Far-reaching strategic decisions stemming from this meeting shaped the
nature of the armed struggle over the next decade, and paved the way for
the ANC's resurgence within the country as the undisputed leader of the
liberation forces.


5.3 Towards People's War and People's Power, 1979-90


The strategic emphasis which shaped struggle from 1979 onwards was the
necessity for an organised underground political presence to complement
armed activities. It was considered essential that ANC operatives should
link up different forms of popular members from the generation of
activists in youth and student bodies, in the trade unions, in township
civics whose protest campaigns were redefining anti-apartheid politics.
The "armed propaganda" of MK attacks would serve as a secondary means to
deepen mass mobilisation.

The watershed 1978 Politico-Military Strategy Commission report under OR
Tambo (also known as The Green Book/Theses on our Strategic Line), again
stressed the primacy of political mobilisation:

"The armed struggle must be based on, and grow out of, mass political
support and it must eventually involve all our people. All military
activities must at every stage be guided by and determined by the need to
generate political mobilisation, organisation and resistance, with the
aim of progressively weakening the enemy's grip on the reins of
political, economic, social and military power, by a combination of
political and military action."

On the role of armed activity at that stage, the report stated that this
served "to keep the perspective of people's revolutionary violence as the
ultimate weapon for the seizure of power", and "to concentrate on armed
propaganda actions whose immediate purpose is to support and stimulate
political activity and organisation rather than to hit at the enemy".

In line with this approach, the Revolutionary Council, formed in 1969 and
chaired by OR Tambo, was restructured to consolidate not only the
supremacy of political leadership but also to ensure that the task of
mass mobilisation and underground organisation received the necessary
emphasis. The senior organs formed in neighbouring countries consisted of
senior leaders and specialists in the building of the political
underground and mass mobilisation, as well as commanders of armed units.
Within the country this translated into an effort to form Area Political
Committees which would take ultimate responsibility for both political
and military work in their areas of operation. Later, these were
transformed into Area and Regional Politico-Military Committees.

A Special Operations group reporting directly to the President was formed
with the mandate of undertaking high profile attacks on targets such as
the Sasolburg oil refinery, Koeberg, and Voortrekkerhoogte - armed
propaganda which would hit the South African economy hard and capture the
imagination of the people.

In 1983 the Revolutionary Council was disbanded and the Politico-Military
Council created, with a Military HQ and Political HQ falling under it.
The detail of these structures is outlined in later sections; but their
evolution again underlines the constant commitment on the part of the ANC
to ensure that the armed struggle formed an integral part of the overall
strategy of the movement, as defined in the "Four Pillars".

At the same time operations by other MK units mounted steadily; one study
estimated that 150 cases of armed action took place between 1976 and
1982, overwhelmingly concentrated on economic targets, the administrative
machinery of apartheid, as well as police and SADF installations and
personnel.

In contrast to this highly disciplined and restrained approach to the use
of violence, the South African regime committed countless atrocities
against civilians not only within the borders of South Africa, but also
through their support for the terrorism of UNITA and Renamo. Cross-border
raids were launched against what were portrayed as "ANC targets" in
neighbouring states - such as the attack on Matola in 1981, the Maseru
massacre of 1982, the raids on Gaberone in 1985, Lusaka in 1987 and
attacks in Harare and Bulawayo, to quote a few examples. Many of those
civilians killed in these operations were nationals of the host
countries. No distinction whatsoever was made between "hard" and "soft"
targets. Anger against the perpetrators of these atrocities mounted.

Again, the words of Oliver Tambo on the avoidance of civilian casualties
in the conduct of armed struggle, come into focus:

"In 1980 we signed the Geneva protocols and said that if we captured any
enemy soldiers we would treat them as prisoners of war. The fact is we
are not against civilians. We do not include them in our definition of
the enemy. The ANC was non-violent for a whole decade in the face of
violence against African civilians. What do we mean by civilians? It
really means white civilians. No one refers to Africans as civilians and
they have been victims of shootings all the time. Even children. They
have been killed in the hundreds. Yet the word has not been used in all
these years. Now it is being used, especially after the Pretoria (SAAF
HQ) bomb. But implicit in the practice of the South African regime is
that when you shoot an African you are not killing a civilian. We don't
want to kill civilians. But some will be hit, quite accidentally and
regrettably".

In mid-1983 MHQ produced a discussion document, Planning for People's
War, which posed the question as to whether the time was ripe to move
away from the 1979 approach towards people's war, defined as a "war in
which a liberation army becomes rooted among the people who progressively
participate actively in the armed struggle both politically and
militarily, including the possibility of engaging in partial or general
uprising". Among the conclusions were that the ANC should continue
carrying out and even escalating those actions which had played an
important role in stimulating political activity, mass resistance and
mass organisation, but that "there should be more concentration on
destroying enemy personnel". The concept of potential future guerrilla
zones inside the country was raised.

This document noted that the policy of arming the people:

"cannot mean that we begin now to distribute arms to whosoever wishes to
receive them among the oppressed. In the first place, we have neither the
capacity nor the means to do this on any meaningful scale. In the second
place it would be completely wrong to engage in a policy of merely
distributing weaponry to people, trusting to luck that they will use them
on the side of the revolution."

What does this discussion document signify? In the first instance, it
reflects the continual debates that were taking place within the ranks of
the liberation movement on how to respond to new situations as they
emerged. Secondly, these debates essentially revolved around the tension
between the restraint of the ANC in the face of the enemy's brutality -
whether we should adopt the easy route, and ease control over the usage
of weapons. Thirdly, at each stage of struggle, people on the ground
would respond with anger to repression, and start to take initiatives
themselves which were not strictly in accordance with the strategy and
tactics of the ANC.

In this context, in addition to the imperative of intensifying the
struggle, the constant challenge facing the ANC was how to channel anger
on the ground to ensure that the strategic perspective of a democratic
and non-racial society would not be sacrificed on the altar of quick-fix,
dramatic and misguided actions. The tension between such intensification
of struggle, and the need to avoid a racial war that the MK Manifesto
eloquently expressed at the time of the founding of the liberation army,
remained with the movement to the last day of armed struggle.

Debates at the highest level of the ANC's political structures during the
1981 anti-Republic Campaign provide an example. Reconnaissance units had
been tasked to identify potential targets to register rejection of the
20th anniversary celebrations of the racist republic. One of our units
had studied the government's programme for the occasion, and reported on
the fact that a mass celebration was to be held at Bloemfontein, in which
PW Botha and his entire cabinet would be present. The sketches of the
venue and details on where a car-bomb could be placed to decimate the
leadership of the NP government were drawn up. The operation needed only
the go-ahead from the national leadership. What could have been the most
dramatic operation ever, reinforcing the mass upsurge at the time and
weakening the apartheid ruling structure, was set aside after much
debate. The leadership concluded that there would be too many civilian
casualties, and that the obliteration of the NP cabinet could start to
blur the distinction between legitimate and illegitimate targets.

This restrained approach contrasts sharply with the attitude of the
regime itself, which considered all members of the ANC, whether they were
MK cadres or not, inside and outside the country, as fair game; which
tried on many occasions to assassinate Oliver Tambo, Chris Hani and other
leaders; which had killed diplomatic Chief Representatives of the ANC and
bombed their offices.

In line with the doctrine of Total Strategy, the Botha regime attempted
to introduce limited constitutional reforms aimed at defusing growing
popular resistance to apartheid rule. In this context, the ANC's January
8th statement of 1984 explicitly identified targets as follows:

"the apartheid regime maintains an extensive administrative system
through which it directs our lives. This system includes organs of
central and provincial government, the army and the police, the
judiciary, the bantustan administrations, the community councils, the
local management and local affairs committees. It is these institutions
of apartheid power that we must attack and demolish, as part of the
struggle to put an end to racist minority rule in our country. Needless
to say...we must select for attack those parts of the enemy
administrative system which we have the power to destroy(...). We must
hit the enemy where it is weakest. (...) Thus, through our efforts, the
so-called Coloured Persons Representative Council ceased to exist; as a
result of extensive mobilisation, the puppet South African Indian Council
was brought in by an insignificant minority.."

"This year, Botha and Malan will be busy implementing the provisions of
their apartheid constitution. (...) White South Africans alone should man
the apartheid constitutional posts, which it alone has created, to its
exclusive benefit. Those who elect to serve in these apartheid
institutions must expect to face the wrath of the people."

The Kabwe conference was held in June 1985 to assess developments since
the Morogoro conference of 1969. The day before it opened, Pretoria
attacked several homes in Gaberone, Botswana, killing 12 people including
Botswana citizens. Not one shot was fired in self-defence; all those
killed were unarmed.

From early September 1984, in response to attempts to increase rent and
electricity levies by the new Black Local Authorities introduced by the
Pretoria regime, an unprecedented united front of trade union, political,
civic, youth and student organisations had mobilised against these moves;
apartheid was in a state of general crisis, and the strategic initiative
had unmistakably shifted towards forces for change. There was a growing
sense that the country was approaching a crossroads.

At Kabwe consensus was reached on a number of major questions including
the approach to military action. It was felt that the Strategy and
Tactics document adopted at the Morogoro conference, which laid stress on
the development of classical guerrilla warfare in the rural areas and
designating a supportive role for urban warfare, was flawed. The primary
perspective that emerged was that the ANC should step up the all-round
political and military offensive sharply, and prepare for protracted
people's war. A general insurrection was seen as the logical culmination
of this struggle, necessitating preparation to take decisive action at
the right moment in order to seize power. This would entail building
combat forces inside the country, ensuring that they link up at all times
with the people and draw the masses into people's war. It was decided
that as many cadres as possible should be trained inside and outside the
country and a detailed cadre policy was to be developed - a handing out
of guns to anyone willing to shoot was never envisaged.

Conference reaffirmed ANC policy with regard to targets considered
legitimate: SADF and SAP personnel and installations, and selected
economic installations and infrastructure. But the risk of civilians
being caught in the crossfire when such operations took place could no
longer be allowed to prevent the urgently needed, all-round
intensification of the armed struggle. The focus of armed operations had
to shift towards striking directly at enemy personnel, and the struggle
had to move out of the townships to the "white" areas.

President Tambo summed up the mood of the Conference. It represented, he
said:

"...a turning point in the history of all the people of South Africa. Our
Conference itself will be remembered by our people as a council-of-war
that planned the seizure of power by these masses, the penultimate
convention that gave the order for us to take our country through the
terrible but cleansing fires of revolutionary war to a condition of
peace, democracy and the fulfilment of our people who have already
suffered far too much and far too long."

And later in his address:

"The apartheid system is in a deep and permanent crisis from which it
cannot extricate itself. (...) Despite massacres and murders that are
carried out daily by Botha's assassination squads, the masses of the
people are engaged in a widespread struggle which the enemy cannot
suppress and which is driving it ever deeper into crisis. Of decisive
importance is the fact that this mass offensive is directed at the
destruction of the apartheid state machinery, at making apartheid
inoperative, at making our country ungovernable."

The questions of ANC policy towards "soft targets" and "taking the
struggle to white areas" arose in the context of the massive increase in
confrontation taking place within the country at the time.

In a press conference after the Kabwe conference, President Tambo dealt
with the issue as follows:

"I will summarise the position taken by the Conference in these terms:
that the struggle must be intensified at all costs. Over the past nine to
ten months at least - at the very least - there have been many soft
targets hit by the enemy. Nearly five hundred people have now died in
that period. That works out to about fifty per month - massacred, shot
down, killed secretly. All those were very, very soft targets. They
belong to the sphere of the intensification of the struggle. What we have
seen in places like the Eastern Cape is what escalation means for
everybody. The distinction between "hard" and "soft" targets is going to
disappear in an intensified confrontation, in an escalating conflict.
(...)

"The question of soft targets was quite out of place during World War II,
to mention a big war. Ours will be a small one, but we are fighting the
same kind of system. It was Hitler who attacked, it is the apartheid
system here which attacked, and we are fighting that system, our own
version of Nazism. I think the distinction between hard and soft targets
is being erased by the development of the conflict. I am not saying that
our Conference used the word "soft targets". I am saying that Conference
recognised that we are in it. It is happening every day. It happened two
days before we started our Conference - a massacre in Gaberone. We did
not complain that soft targets were being hit, because they have been
hitting them, as I say, all the time. What we did was to re-commit
ourselves to intensify the armed struggle until that kind of massacre,
until the system which makes massacres and conflicts necessary, is
abolished..."

The ANC's understanding of the need to carry the struggle out of black
areas is succinctly expressed in an article which appeared in the
November 1985 issue of the ANC mouthpiece Sechaba. Although a personal
opinion, this extract captures the essence of the debate in ANC ranks:

"An outstanding lesson of this determined popular resistance is that
revolutionary activity whose scope does not extend beyond the black
township is a misdirected blow. It does not hit the established order at
its soft spots. The townships are not the weak links, rather they are
ramparts of the status quo, like the Bantustans. No strategic or
significant government or economic installations are in the townships.
There are only administrative boards, community councils, minor police
stations and magistrates' courts. There are no businesses under ASSOCOM,
FCI or AHI, the destruction of whose businesses can make political heads
roll. Township upheavals reach the attention of white households through
television screens, the radio and newspapers. This is the way whites come
to know of Beirut car bombs or Israeli invasions of Lebanon and the
carnage that accompany them. There is no sense of immediacy. Soweto, New
Brighton, Alexandra township and so on are as far from PE or Johannesburg
as Beirut is (...) To shake the regime, Soweto must come to Johannesburg,
New Brighton to Port Elizabeth. (...)

"The present mass action has by far outpaced armed struggle and armed
propaganda. Armed propaganda at a time when the masses are stoning
Casspir armoured vehicles is an anachronism.

"We have witnessed for a whole year sustained mass onslaughts against the
enemy, that have reached fever pitch with every cruel blow that the
bloodstained apartheid regime has unleashed... A critically urgent demand
of the present situation is for the unarmed mass battles that have raged
without cessation in the last year to be synchronised with co-ordinated,
stunning armed blows against the enemy's armed personnel and
installations."

By the end of 1985 an official ANC pamphlet titled Take the Struggle to
the White Areas! was distributed inside the country. Targets were
identified as "the racist army, police, death squads, agents and stooges
in our midst", and the call to "take the war to the white areas" is
defined as follows:

* Strengthening our workers' organisations and engaging in united
  action in the factories, mines, farms and suburbs.
* Spreading the consumer boycott to all areas of the country.
* Organised and well-planned demonstrations in the white suburbs and
  central business districts.
* Forming underground units and combat groups in our places of work and
  taking such actions as sabotage in the factories, mines, farms and
  suburbs, and disrupting the enemy's oil, energy, transport,
  communications and other vital systems.
* Systematic attack against the army and police and the so-called area
  defence units in the white areas.
* Well-planned raids on the armouries and dumps of the army, police,
  farmers and so on to secure arms for our units.

There was reference to the "special role" of "all anti-apartheid whites".

"Let us all act in unity against a system that has brought so much
suffering to so many, and that continues to drown thousands in blood."

The period between 1985 and 1988 witnessed unprecedented violence,
overwhelmingly directed at black civilians. As the regime fought to
regain the strategic initiative it had lost, it employed unbridled
terrorist violence and a range of overt and covert measures which are
dealt with more fully elsewhere in this document.

MK attacks mounted steadily with most operations concentrated on targets
as set out in ANC policy; there was an all-round intensification of
efforts to destroy all organs of the apartheid state, to encourage the
emergence of People's War (summed up in the 1986 slogan "Every patriot a
combatant, every combatant a patriot!") and to promote the establishment
of organs of people's power. By the end of 1986, the regime had lost
administrative control over large parts of the country.

It was during the mid-1980s that attacks on certain targets with no
directly apparent connection to the apartheid state took place. In some
cases these attacks resulted from the manner in which cadres interpreted
the decision to sharply intensify the armed struggle, which would entail
exercising less restraint, and the call to take the struggle to the white
areas. Militant rhetoric in Sechaba articles reflected the mood of the
times: "The attack on South African refugees in Botswana by the racist
forces just before the conference emphasised the need for our movement to
bleed the enemy."

Most of those cadres who carried out bona fide operations of this nature
had reason to believe that they were operating in accordance with the
political will of the leadership of the ANC. But the apartheid regime was
very quick to exploit this tactical shift with regard to intensification
of the struggle and shift in focus of armed operations, combined with the
misinterpretation of these decisions by some cadres, and carried out a
number of "false flag" attacks on civilian targets with the sole
objective of destroying the ANC's claim to the moral high ground,
considered strategically essential by the ANC leadership to the success
of the national liberation struggle. The apartheid regime fought tooth
and nail to destroy the ANC's image and damage the steady growth of
international solidarity with the struggle for democracy, portraying the
liberation movement as no more than a gang of bloodthirsty and cowardly
terrorists with no popular support.

The ANC leadership took action to assert policy with regard to the
avoidance of civilian targets, which had in some cases become confused
with the need to intensify the struggle "at all costs." The January 8th,
1987 statement called on ANC supporters to:

"ensure that we build up our combat forces into a true People's Army in
its national and social composition, in its size, effectiveness and the
nature of its operations.

"It must continue to distinguish itself from the apartheid death forces
by the bravery of its combatants, its dedication to the cause of
liberation and peace, and its refusal to act against civilians, both
black and white. But the People's Army, Umkhonto we Sizwe, must in all
its elements, act boldly against the apartheid enemy and create the
conditions when our superior forces will finally overrun and overthrow
the apartheid regime of terror."

This statement called on ANC cadres to mobilise the white population,
which should fuse with and become part of the motive forces of the
democratic revolution:

"Our white compatriots have to learn the truth that it is not democracy
that threatens their future. Rather, it is racist tyranny which poses a
dire peril to their very survival. (...) Black mothers have to live with
the agony of burying their children every day. (...) Across the
barricades, white mothers see their children transformed and perverted
into mindless killers who will not stop at murdering the black unarmed
(...) These black and white mothers must reach across the divide created
by the common enemy of our people and form a human chain to stop the
murderous rampage of the apartheid system."

When attacks which did not accord with ANC policy started to become a
trend in late 1987, MK commanders were instructed by OR Tambo and the NEC
to go to all forward areas and as far as possible also meet with units
operating inside the country to reassert ANC policy with regard to the
avoidance of purely civilian targets. Failure to comply with these orders
would be considered as violations of policy and action would be taken
against offenders.

In August 1988 the NEC issued a statement specifically on the conduct of
armed struggle in the country:

"The NEC further re-affirmed the centrality of the armed struggle in the
national democratic revolution and the need to further escalate armed
actions and transform our offensive into a generalised people's war.
(...,) However, the NEC also expressed concern at the recent spate of
attacks on civilian targets. Some of these attacks have been carried out
by cadres of the people's army, Umkhonto we Sizwe, inspired by anger at
the regime's campaign of terror against the oppressed and democratic
forces, both within and outside South Africa. In certain instances
operational circumstances resulted in unintended casualties.

"Yet it has come to our notice that agents of the Pretoria regime have
been detailed to carry out a number of bomb attacks deliberately to sow
confusion among the people of South Africa and the international
community, and to discredit the African National Congress.

"The ANC hereby underscores that it is contrary to our policy to select
targets whose sole objective is to strike at civilians. Our morality as
revolutionaries dictates that we respect the values underpinning the
humane conduct of war. Any other course of action would also play into
the hands of the enemy."

As we have indicated earlier the ANC's approach to armed struggle was
underpinned by the fact that this form of struggle was part of, and not
parallel to, the other "pillars of struggle": underground organisation,
mass mobilisation and international solidarity. In addition, as the
struggle intensified, it became clear that greater insecurity was
starting to set in within the white community. Many individuals began to
appreciate the inhumane and immoral nature of the apartheid system, and
began to actively support the anti-apartheid cause. Resistance to forced
conscription grew dramatically. Developments of this nature reinforced
what had always been ANC policy: to mobilise as many South Africans as
possible, from all backgrounds, against the system of apartheid.

The mass revolt and intensification of the armed struggle enhanced the
ANC's efforts to mobilise international support against apartheid; the
Western powers which had viewed our struggle through the narrow and
distorted lenses of East-West conflict, began to acknowledge the justness
of our cause and the legitimacy of the ANC. The organisation itself had
intensified its attempts to make contact with these governments, and
these initiatives were begining to bear fruit. At last, what had long
been acknowledged by Africa and other developing countries, by the
governments of Eastern Europe, Scandinavia and a few developed countries
within the Commonwealth, was starting to take root within the governments
of the major Western powers.

This range of developments, coupled with the ANC's own firm policies,
vindicated and reinforced the approach that the ANC had consistently
maintained regarding conduct of struggle in general and armed struggle in
particular.

The ANC is immensely proud of the bravery, discipline and selfless
sacrifices of its MK combatants, many of whom laid down their lives in
pursuit of freedom for all in South Africa. They worked in one of the
most dangerous and difficult arenas of struggle for a non-racial and
democratic South Africa. They were prepared to work under conditions in
which, if captured or abducted, they faced the possibility of summary
execution whether they surrendered or not. They faced being tortured to
death, or coming under intense pressure to choose between death and
collaboration. If brought to trial, they faced the death penalty or
extremely lengthy prison sentences

At times, particularly during the mid-1980s, our cadres worked under
conditions of blanket state terrorism against a largely unarmed and
defenceless civilian population, and indiscriminate, merciless attacks on
any available ANC target abroad. Given these conditions, and also taking
into account that a general state of people's war against apartheid was
developing, it is remarkable that very few attacks by MK cadres violated
ANC policy with regard to civilian targets.

Yet we do acknowledge that some incidents not entirely consistent with
ANC policy did take place.


5.4 The ANC and internal mass revolt: The role of the Mass Democratic
Movement in the 1980s


While the ANC pursued its concerted campaign against apartheid from exile
and the underground, there were new internal political developments from
the late 1970s onwards which reinforced the effectiveness of the
organisation and slowly but surely helped shift the balance of power in
favour of the disenfranchised majority in South Africa. The struggle
became increasingly organised on three main fronts: the armed and
underground struggle of the banned ANC, the rapidly expanding black trade
union movement (membership jumped from 40,000 in 1975 to 247,000 in 1981
and to 1.5 million in 1985), and re-emerging legal, mass-based community
and political movements. These strands of resistance on various fronts
became increasingly interlinked in the 1980s, in the process enhancing
the position of the ANC as the vanguard movement in the struggle for
democracy in South Africa.

The formation of the United Democratic Front (UDF) as a broad internal
anti-apartheid umbrella body transformed the South African political
landscape. Not only did it bring with it an unprecedented level of
popular mobilisation, but it also marked a maturing of ideological
orientation away from the Black Consciousness movement of the 1970s
towards the more broadly-based non-racial struggle propounded by the ANC.

Most UDF supporters backed the Freedom Charter, the guiding document of
the ANC adopted in 1955, and while the UDF emphasised its autonomy for
legal and tactical reasons it became recognised by friend and foe alike
as part of the ANC "congress tradition". Although it was illegal to
identify openly with the ANC or express support for the armed struggle,
the UDF stressed that it shared the broad aims espoused by the ANC. It
opened a new front in the struggle for democracy that would complement
and not, it emphasised, attempt to supersede the struggle of the
respected exile movement. Imprisoned ANC leaders were made patrons of the
UDF, and some joined the UDF in leadership positions on their release
from prison. The UDF also appropriated many of the songs, slogans and
symbols of the ANC.

Despite the identification of the UDF (and later, the Mass Democratic
Movement) with the ANC, they were essentially separate bodies, not direct
extensions of the ANC. While broad policy was often in line with ANC
positions in exile and the underground, day-to-day activities and
campaigns were based on local initiatives and conditions. The strength of
the UDF was that it linked diverse organisations among youth, students,
workers, township and village residents, took up bread-and-butter issues
directly affecting the daily lives and living conditions of the people in
the various sectors, and was able to organise successful non-violent mass
campaigns around these concerns and grievances.

The mass struggles of the 1980s went through two main phases. The first
was the legal, mass mobilisation on an ideological and organisational
level to promote a non-racial alternative to apartheid and to discredit
manoeuvres by the apartheid state to sell its sham tricameral "reform"
programme, geared towards entrenching racial separation and privilege.
The cross-section of groups which coalesced into the UDF succeeded
spectacularly in their aim of creating an anti-apartheid platform for the
democratic-minded majority, despite continual harassment and the closing
of already limited legal avenues of expression by the state.

Then, on September 3, 1984, the day on which the racist tricameral system
and the new executive state president of South Africa were inaugurated,
the so-called Vaal uprisings broke out, ushering in a new phase of
militancy and resistance in South Africa. Over the next few months urban
revolt became endemic, spreading from the Witwatersrand to many other
parts of the country. Spontaneous street clashes between township
residents and the apartheid security forces superseded the organisational
forms of response established by the recently-formed UDF.

Soon state authority collapsed completely in certain areas as angry
crowds responded through direct action to economic hardships and the
imposition of illegitimate black local councils as part of the new
tricameral system. By mid-1985, in line with ANC strategy, which both
influenced and was inspired by the popular revolt against apartheid, a
situation of "ungovernability" existed in many areas. The distinction
between legal forms of political activity and the underground struggle of
the ANC was becoming blurred. Enthusiastic support for the ANC was
expressed daily despite strict deterrent laws. The organisation could
claim without contradiction at that stage that "the people are engaged in
active struggle as a conscious revolutionary force, and accept the ANC as
their vanguard movement". By the end of the 1980s the ANC had effectively
been unbanned by the people despite all the efforts to demonise and crush
it.

Recognising that it was in danger of losing control, the apartheid
government decided in July 1985 to proclaim a State of Emergency in 36
districts throughout the country. Virtual martial law descended over
these areas. The apartheid rulers were acknowledging the collapse of
apartheid reform, and their ever-increasing reliance on violence to
maintain control.

The country was plunged into the dark abyss of hit squads and extra legal
state terror, bannings, army occupations and further states of emergency
- a history which we trust the TRC will piece together bit by bloody bit,
so that the jigsaw puzzle of what happened can finally be completed.


===========================================================================



6. Did the ANC Perpetuate any Gross Violations of Human Rights



6.1 The Approach, Standards and Conduct of the ANC in Relation to Human
Rights


What considerations, during these years of intensified armed activity,
did the ANC give to questions of morality and codes of military conduct?
Civilian casualties are frequent and notorious consequences of irregular
forms of military combat. There were instances in which the ANC's own
policies in this regard were contradicted or ignored: these are dealt
with later in this submission. At the same time, the historical record is
clear. It was ANC policy - ever since the formation of MK in 1961 - to
avoid unnecessary loss of life. The ANC has never permitted random
attacks on civilian targets. Unlike many other liberation movements as
well as resistance movements in the Second World War, the ANC
scrupulously sought to ensure that civilians were not targeted.

In its first sabotage campaign, in the early 1960s, the High Command of
MK sought to ensure that attacks on government installations would not
lead to loss of life. When MK units were first sent into action they were
under strict instructions not to jeopardise the lives of civilians and
did not carry arms. Subsequently, when armed guards were encountered at
possible targets, regional committees were instructed to arm units but
cadres were ordered to shoot only in self-defence. Once MK camps had been
established, part of the training of every MK combatant was political and
included the insistence that the enemy should not be defined simply in
racial terms. When the ANC became a signatory to the Geneva Convention on
the conduct of war in 1977 it was the first liberation movement in the
world to take this step. Adherence to the terms of the Convention
confirmed the movement's commitment to avoid attacks on civilians and the
"humanitarian conduct" of war.

At the ANC's Kabwe Conference in June 1985, this position was modified,
but not abandoned. A resolution was adopted which acknowledged that there
would be unavoidable civilian casualties as warfare escalated. The
previous restraint in order to avoid such casualties, it was felt at
Kabwe, should no longer be allowed to undermine the campaign to intensify
the armed struggle against the regime.

It is worth noting that the armed struggle was conducted in circumstances
which were never easy, and which at times seemed almost insurmountably
difficult. The politics of exile is a notoriously testing terrain, pitted
with insecurity and dependent upon the goodwill of others for resources.
The main training camps and bases of MK were far distant from South
African soil. Those countries which offered sanctuary to ANC and MK
personnel were themselves hard-pressed, and the sanctuary frequently
carried its own dangers. The efforts by the South African state to
destroy the ANC and MK were unceasing, and massively financed. Besides
military and police offensives against MK, methods included infiltration
by state agents and spies; cross-border raids and kidnapping; pressure on
the front-line states to expel ANC members; assassinations, torture and a
wide repertoire of "dirty tricks".

Despite all these difficulties, the ANC retained its commitment to
internationally acceptable forms of combat; it never sanctioned
"terrorism", which could be defined as military attacks on civilians by
armed groups or individuals. When some of its cadres transgressed this
policy their actions were regretted and in some cases publicly
repudiated. The ANC did not visit systematic violence and intimidation
upon civilians; it did not use the military methods used in the defence
of racism. When weighed in the scales of history, the ANC and the South
African apartheid regime occupy opposite ends of the spectrum both in
terms of policy and practical conduct.

Given the historical and political context provided above, it would seem
natural to attempt to justify everything that happened within the context
of struggle against apartheid as acceptable, and therefore not to be
scrutinised in line with the mandate of the Commission. But the morality
of the ANC, its objectives then and now, and the standards it set itself,
dictate that we examine the conduct of struggle critically, and
acknowledge where errors took place.

The logic of the Commission is that the truth should be acknowledged, no
matter how painful, so as to ensure that conditions are created under
which it is impossible for any terrible things from the past to recur. It
is in this spirit that we approach this question.


6.2 Armed operations and civilian casualties


6.2.1 Political approach to armed struggle

As outlined in Section 5 above, the approach of the ANC to armed struggle
hinged on its strategic objective of a united, non-racial, non-sexist and
democratic South Africa.

To recapitulate. Firstly, armed struggle was forced on an organisation
that had for many years espoused and practised peaceful methods of
struggle. Secondly, it was part of the "four pillars" of struggle - as
such, it had to be conducted in such a way as to reinforce rather than
undermine these other "pillars". Thirdly, from the beginning, a narrow
definition of targets was made, and maximum restraint was exercised.
Fourthly, there was pressure to pursue options such as attacks against
white civilians, and there were intense debates on these issues,
especially in response to state repression; but the movement again and
again reasserted its basic principles. Lastly, structures set up to lead
armed struggle were adapted to concrete conditions, and in each instance,
to strengthen political control of the military campaign.

Given the ever-increasing militarisation of white South Africa from the
late 1970s onwards, and the unbridled violence used against civilians by
the former apartheid regimes, we submit that the ANC always exercised
exceptional restraint in the conduct of armed struggle. Since the
founding of MK in 1961, the ANC never deviated from its belief that it
was not only morally wrong but strategically senseless to attack civilian
targets.

6.2.2 The politico-military chain of command

After the setbacks of the capture of the MK High Command at Rivonia, and
subsequent trials, the process of building ANC and MK structures in exile
began. Senior leaders of the movement trained and lived in the camps with
the recruits, and were charged with the task of ensuring that the
political objectives of the ANC were understood by all cadres, as well as
maintaining discipline during the training process. After the
Wankie/Sipolilo Campaign with ZAPU in 1967/68, the Morogoro Conference
was held in 1969, and the Revolutionary Council (RC) was established.
Chaired by OR Tambo, the RC included both political and military leaders,
and was tasked mainly with establishing an underground political presence
in the country, as well as with infiltrating cadres into the country to
carry out military operations.

By the mid-1970s, as Angola was liberated, the ANC was in the position to
command its own camps and a General Headquarters was established in
Luanda.

The General Staff - that is, MK Headquarters - divided South Africa into
a number of operational areas which were controlled from two major
fronts: the Eastern Front from Mozambique into Swaziland, and the Western
Front from Zambia into Botswana.

By 1978 the first MK operations by units of the Transvaal Urban Machinery
took place. These were aimed at police stations in the PWV area. At the
same time attacks were launched from the Western Front, aimed at
establishing guerrilla bases in the Western Transvaal.

At this time the ANC's dilemma was that in order to be successful
militarily, it had to establish a political base inside the country: yet
a political base could not grow without military actions serving to
reinforce people's confidence and motivate them to become involved in
political and other forms of resistance. There was a need to capture the
imagination of the oppressed through demonstrating that the enemy was not
invincible, and to gain international recognition of the armed struggle.

To this end, Special Operations was established in 1979. Reporting
directly to the President, this unit was charged with the task of
carrying out attacks on major installations. These were carried out in
such a way as to avoid loss of life. For instance, thousands of people
worked at the Sasol Oil Refinery plant; a massive civilian death toll
could have resulted from this attack, but it was specifically carried out
at a time when no loss of life would occur.

A new Military Headquarters (MHQ) was established in December 1982,
bringing together and reorganising the old General Headquarters,
operating from the Eastern and Western Fronts at HQ in Lusaka, along
formal military lines.

In an attempt to co-ordinate the activities between the military front
commands and the internal political committee structures, senior organs
were set up in neighbouring countries, consisting of the political and
military leadership in those areas.

A conference of all front commanders and commissars was held in Maputo in
April 1983 to address the growing problem of a lack of effective
co-ordination between the military and political aspects of the struggle.
The Revolutionary Council was replaced by the Politico-Military Council
(PMC), which became the most senior structure after the National
Executive Committee. The PMC consisted of a Secretariat, an Internal
Political Committee, Military HQ, and Intelligence (also known as NAT),
consisting of Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence and Security sections.

The PMC was charged with implementing decisions of the NEC with regard to
political and military aspects of the struggle, and with providing
overall political-military leadership. It was chaired by OR Tambo, and
consisted of a Secretary from the NEC, representatives of MHQ, the head
of the Internal Political Committee and other NEC members in this
committee, the heads of the Intelligence and Security structures, and the
secretaries general of the ANC, SACP and SACTU. Several other NEC members
also served on the PMC.

The earlier senior organs were replaced by Regional PMCs in order to
create a link between the PMC and structures on the ground. Those RPMCs
in what were known as the "forward areas" were given greater freedom
regarding decisions to carry out operations. Whilst the PMC was aware of
the number of units on the ground in the country, for security reasons
information on the actual identities of operatives was not available to
this structure; the RPMCs dealt with information of this nature. RPMCs
were charged with co-ordinating political and military activities in
their areas of responsibility inside South Africa, and where possible
setting up Area PMCs inside the country. The role of Area PMCs was to
provide local-level leadership with regard to political and military
matters, the gathering of intelligence, and screening of recruits.

In 1984 Special Operations was moved to MHQ.

For several reasons, including intense military and diplomatic pressure
by the Pretoria regime on neighbouring states, and the movement towards a
political settlement in Namibia which resulted in the ANC being obliged
to close down its military training camps in Angola, the work of MK in
general and RPMCs in particular was seriously hampered. In 1986, the
top-secret Operation Vula was initiated with the aim of creating a
national politico-military leadership inside the country, led by senior
NEC and MK leaders.

All these changes represented increasing assertion of political
leadership over armed struggle.

In addition, the political maturity of cadres was taken into account when
appointments were made to structures such as the RPMCs. And the process
of training was seen as critical in equipping cadres with the political
understanding necessary to ensure that they acted in accordance with ANC
policy.

6.2.3 Training and codes of conduct

MK training always emphasised the need for personal initiative, and
sought to develop the capacity of operatives to use their own discretion
based on strict political considerations. Except for major operations,
senior commanders provided guidelines and a framework within which
operatives were expected to execute their missions: hence the strong
emphasis always laid in MK training on political education and the
insistence that at all times the ANC and MK should occupy the moral high
ground - nothing which consciously or unconsciously undermined this vital
factor could be allowed.

The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Code, which is attached to this
submission, makes it clear that the political leadership was supreme, and
"every commander, commissar, instructor and combatant must therefore be
clearly acquainted with the policy with regard to all combat tasks and
missions". Over twenty punishable offences are listed, many relating
directly to military discipline. Among these offences are the following:

* Rebellion or revolt against the army command or part of it, or
  attempts to commit such an act of rebellion or revolt.
* Conduct that weakens the people's trust, confidence and faith in the
  ANC and Umkhonto.
* Assaults, rape, disorderly conduct, the use of insulting and/or
  obscene language, bullying and intimidation, whether against a comrade
  or a member of the public.
* Ill-treatment of prisoners of war or persons in custody.
* Any act or speech that provokes tribal or regional animosities or
  spreads disunity by means of factionalism and/or racism.

We will now focus on categories of armed actions, particularly those
which resulted in civilian casualties.

6.2.4 Conduct of war and civilian casualties

It has been established earlier in our submission that the ANC was
fighting a just war, and that this was recognised in international law.
The provisions of the Geneva Convention and subsequent protocols are
relevant in this regard. The refusal on the part of former apartheid
regimes to recognise that the ANC was waging an internationally
recognised war, and their refusal to honour certain provisions of the
Geneva Convention and Protocols, were directly relevant in certain cases
in which there was unnecessary loss of civilian life.

After the December 1982 attack on Maseru in which 42 people were killed,
including 12 BaSotho, Secretary General Alfred Nzo stated at a meeting on
Heroes Day, December 16th:

"...Our popular army under the leadership of the ANC, heroic combatants
such as Solomon Mahlangu, have not sought out white South Africa in its
bedrooms, claiming that these bedrooms were military bases. We have not
sought to attack the diplomatic missions of the apartheid regime as it
has in our case when it assassinated Boy Mvemve in Zambia, Joe Gqabi in
Zimbabwe, the Nyawoses in Swaziland, and now Zola Nqini in Lesotho - and
bombed ANC offices here in London. We have done none of this because we
are not terrorists. We are combatants for the emancipation of millions
from racism, national oppression, super-exploitation, fascism and war. As
such we shall continue to intensify the offensive against the Apartheid
enemy of humanity on all fronts. In that offensive, the enemy will
increasingly suffer the kind of losses in its personnel that it suffered
during our attack on its Komatipoort garrison two weeks ago..."

The May 20, 1983 car bomb attack on South African Air Force (SAAF)
Headquarters in Church Street, Pretoria, and the ANC's use of landmines
in areas which were designated as military zones provide examples of this
nature.

In the attack on SAAF Headquarters just after 16h30, nineteen people were
killed, of which at least eleven were SAAF officers. Over 200 people were
injured, of which over seventy were members or employees of the armed
forces. The car bomb was positioned precisely in front of the entrance to
Air Force HQ, which took the direct impact of the explosion: many
military personnel were killed. The toll may have been far higher as
hundreds of military personnel would normally gather in the street to
await transport only minutes after the bomb exploded. Both the cadres who
set up the car bomb were killed in the blast; one was in the car at the
time and the other standing across the road. MHQ believes that the remote
trigger mechanism may have been affected by other signals in the area, or
that the cadres made some kind of mistake.

There is no doubt whatsoever that this was overwhelmingly a military
target. Many of those injured may have not been military officers but
were employed by the SAAF, and had thereby directly associated themselves
with apartheid military aggression.

The attack took place after a week in which the white Parliament had been
debating the new tri-cameral constitution bill, from which black people
were excluded. It also took place in the overall context of heightened
military aggression by the apartheid state, most forcefully displayed in
its raid on December 9, 1982, on Lesotho and the assassination of Ruth
First in Maputo. In the Maseru attack no fewer than 42 people were
massacred, many of them civilians. The ANC had decided that a highly
visible attack against uniformed enemy personnel which the Pretoria
regime could not cover up was necessary. Previously, no direct operations
had been carried out against enemy personnel beyond a few skirmishes in
which MK units had been involved in rural areas.

In a response to questions about the attack OR Tambo stated that "the
policy of the ANC is to intensify the struggle, attack the enemy,
avoiding civilians where possible." In the past the ANC had concentrated
on sabotage of installations, "but intensification involves not just
sabotage but attacking the enemy forces".

MK had very carefully weighed up the implications of launching an attack
of this nature, had ensured that it must be an overwhelmingly military
target, yet took no delight in the loss of life it entailed.

The regime promised to "avenge" the dead, "whatever their colour"; they
attacked Maputo on May 23, 1983, hitting the Somopel jam and fruit juice
factory and its creche, a storeroom in which the ANC had kept food and
clothing, and three private homes. Only one of the dead, and none of the
injured, were linked to the ANC. According to the Mozambican government,
six civilians were killed and 40 injured. Two were children, and two were
women - one of them pregnant. The British ambassador to Mozambique stated
publicly that the targets hit by the Pretoria regime were unequivocally
civilian after touring the area with other diplomats. The SADF claimed
they had destroyed five "ANC bases". A spokesperson stated that "the SADF
does not accept blame for civilian deaths that may have occurred. It puts
the responsibility on the Mozambique government as a result of their ties
with the ANC".

In some respects the attack on Air Force HQ - a decisive step towards
waging urban guerrilla warfare - and the revenge raid on Maputo marked a
turning point, a watershed on the path to intensifying conflict in the
country.

The ANC's limited use of landmines, beginning in late 1985, provides
another example of this nature.

Operatives were under strict instructions to carry out reconnaissance
properly so that military patrols were the primary targets of landmine
operations. In one case, a Casspir armoured vehicle detonated a mine in
Mamelodi township. In the border areas, where nearly all landmines were
detonated, the precise targeting of military patrols was easier said than
done. Nevertheless, MHQ continued to stress policy regarding careful
reconnaissance and avoidance of civilian targets, although white farmers
in these areas were not defined as civilians even by the apartheid state
itself: they were its first line of defence.

While regretting all loss of life, the ANC believes that the use of
landmines on white border farms was justified because the apartheid
regime had declared them military zones, with white farmers integrated
into the security system and provided with the tools of war including
automatic weapons, which were only legally possessed by members of the
apartheid armed forces.

In 1979 the Promotion of Density of Population in Designated Areas Act,
No. 87, was passed in an attempt to stem the exodus of white farmers from
border areas, and increase the number of farmers in these areas to serve
as a barrier against the infiltration of guerrillas from neighbouring
states. At least R100 million was made available over a period of five to
six years for the provisions of loans to such farmers, and for the
construction of strategic roads and airstrips in these areas.

The Act stipulated that loans be given on condition that farms were
managed according to SADF directives, and that all white farmers in the
areas should undergo military training, be members of the regional and
area commandos, and make themselves available to the SADF and Department
of National Security to carry out reconnaissance and intelligence tasks
whenever called on to do so. All were linked to the Commando system of
part-time SADF forces and the military radio network known as MARNET.
Many farm buildings were constructed in such a way as to constitute a
chain of defence strongholds along the borders ready to be used by the
SADF whenever necessary. The Act stipulated that the SADF was empowered
to enter any property in the designated area to demolish or erect
military facilities or any other structure without the consent of the
owner.

The SA Agricultural Union, the SADF, SAP, Departments of National
Security and Transport all participated in the sub-committee appointed by
the Steyn Commission to look into how the white farmer population could
be included in the defence strategy of the apartheid regime. These were
not merely defensive measures; Messina and Louis Trichardt, Alldays,
Ellisras, Thabazimbi and Zeerust, Piet Retief and Amsterdam were all key
towns in the regime's military strategy to launch armed aggression
against neighbouring countries.

In May 1983 regulations were introduced to tighten up the earlier
legislation, and in late 1984 the 10km designated zone along the Zimbabwe
and Botswana borders was increased to 50km. In addition, there was
extensive deployment of military and police counter-insurgency units
along the borders, and several operational bases were established.

To illustrate the ANC's approach to these matters: in an article
published in the May 1986 issue of Sechaba extreme aversion was expressed
at:

"the extent to which the illegal regime is prepared to go in the
militarisation of white areas and the white population in the border
regions at whatever cost, even if it means putting the precious lives of
young children at risk as targets of guerrilla attacks, is shown by the
inclusion of white school children between the ages of 13 and 17 in
military programmes (...)

"The contempt in which the regime holds the lives of both white adult
civilians and children (not to mentions black lives) can perhaps be
understood better if one recalls that the Geneva Protocol of 12th August
1949 states that:

" 'The presence or movements of the civilian population or individual
civilians shall not be used to render certain points or areas immune from
military operations, in particular in attempts to shield military
objectives from attacks or to shield, favour or impede military
operations. The Parties to the conflict shall not direct the movement of
the civilian population or individual civilians in order to attempt to
shield military objectives from attacks or to shield military operations.'

"Article 13 of the same document states that 'civilians shall enjoy the
protection afforded by this Party unless and for such a time as they take
a direct part in hostilities'."

While regretting all loss of life in the course of the armed struggle,
the ANC contends that with regard to landmine explosions in which some
farm workers and farmers, and their relatives were killed or maimed, it
is undeniable that it was the apartheid regime itself which took steps
towards obliterating the distinction between the civilian and military
spheres from the time of its adoption of its "total strategy" programme
in 1977, and its later declaration of these areas as military zones.

The much-publicised case of the car bomb explosion at the Magoos and Why
Not bars on June 14, 1986 provides another example of an operation in
which civilians were victims in the context of the intensification of the
armed struggle. Three civilians were killed, and 69 injured. Robert John
McBride, an MK operative attached to Special Operations, was convicted of
the attack and sentenced to death and 82 years imprisonment.

The operation was carried out during a time of extreme political upheaval
in the country, which had culminated in the declaration of a nationwide
State of Emergency on June 12; this granted virtually unlimited powers to
the Security Forces, and granted them indemnity from prosecution for any
actions carried out during this period. The attack was also carried out
to commemorate the June 16, 1976 uprising, in which hundreds of
schoolchildren were killed by the police. It commemorated the anniversary
of the June 14 1985 raid on Gaberone, on the eve of the Kabwe Conference,
in which 12 people were killed, including two young women who were
citizens of Botswana, a six-year old child from Lesotho, a Somalian
citizen, and eight South Africans of whom only five were members of the
ANC and none were MK combatants.

This attack was in line with the ANC's attempts to take the struggle out
of the black ghettos and into the white areas: the Why Not bar was
targeted precisely because it was frequented by off-duty members of the
Security Forces.

Robert McBride was charged with "attempting to overthrow or endanger
State authority in the Republic and/or to achieve, bring about or promote
constitutional, political, social, industrial, and/or economic change in
the Republic". The court accepted that the motives of all those involved
in this operation were political, not personal.

Robert McBride spent four years on Death Row before he was granted
indemnity and released in 1992 along with the racist mass-murderer Barend
Strydom, in a transparent attempt to create the impression in the minds
of the public that the actions of these men were indistinguishable in
moral terms. McBride took personal initiatives to approach the families
of those who had been killed, to apologise for the deaths of their
relatives. Yet he has been consistently targeted for a vicious and
strident campaign by those who, to date, refuse to acknowledge their
responsibility for, or collaboration in, the murders of thousands of
unarmed civilians over the years.

6.2.5 Operational difficulties leading to unintended consequences:

At times, operations were derailed when cadres unexpectedly found
themselves in situations for which there had been no planning whatsoever.

The Silverton Bank siege, in which two civilian women and three MK cadres
were killed, provides an example of this problem. This incident also
illustrates the manner in which the regime's refusal to admit that it was
involved in a state of war, and to accord MK cadres prisoner-of-war
status - usually insisting on opening fire instead of taking captives -
resulted in many unnecessary casualties.

On January 25, 1980 three MK cadres on their way to carry out a mission
realised that they had been spotted and were being tailed by police.
Stephen Mafoko, Humphrey Makhubo and Wilfred Madela tried to escape
almost certain death by entering a bank; they moved all civilians present
into one corner in an attempt to ensure that they would not be caught in
the line of fire, and held them hostage in support of their demands. The
Minister of Police refused to disclose these demands to the public but it
was reported that they wanted to see the Prime Minister, the release of
Nelson Mandela and James Mange, and an aircraft to fly to Maputo. A
police unit stormed the bank and all three cadres and two civilian women,
named Valerie Anderson and Anna de Klerk, were killed.

This was the only incident in which MK cadres, in contravention of ANC
policy, seized hostages for political ends. The Pretoria regime sent out
disinformation to the effect that the ANC had issued a statement in
Lusaka saying that MK is involved in a "campaign to kill and seize
hostages". This was vigorously denied by the ANC, and interpreted as not
only an attempt to smear the organisation but also to prepare the ground
for attacks on ANC targets.

On April 14, 1980 nine ANC members - all of whom had left the country in
1976 to join the ANC - appeared in the Pretoria Magistrate's court in
connection with the Silverton Bank Siege, alleged plans to attack the
Port Natal Administration Board, and an attack on January 4 on Soekmekaar
police station in which no damage was caused and one policeman was
slightly injured. They were charged with high treason, two counts of
murder, and 21 of attempted murder. All pleaded not guilty, and also
denied there were plans to attack the Port Natal Administration Board.

None of them was accused of being present at the Silverton siege but all
nine were accused of murdering the two women (according to the "common
purpose" doctrine). Benjamin Tau alone was also charged with conspiring
with the three dead cadres to carry out the bank siege (although he had
been in custody at the time), and of surveying the premises beforehand.
Ikanyeng Molebatsi and Benjamin Tau were accused of conspiring with the
Silverton trio to launch a rocket attack on petrol tanks at Watloo near
Mamelodi, and also of planning to attack the Pretoria West and Villiera
police stations.

Petrus Mashigo told the court that the attack on Soekmekaar police
station had been intended as "armed propaganda" in protest against the
forced removal of the community in the area. It was intended to show the
ANC sympathised with the plight of the people and to demonstrate to
police that what they were doing was wrong. Mashigo testified that during
his training cadres were told not to use methods involving the killing of
civilians, and that the ANC opposed methods such as the taking of
hostages. Ikanyeng Molebatsi testified that they had decided against
carrying out the attack on the Watloo tank farm because too many lives
would be lost.

Benjamin Tau admitted he had infiltrated the country on a mission to
attack the Watloo installations but denied he had reconnoitred the bank
for attack; police had forced him to point at the bank and then
photographed him. He said he would refuse to attack a bank because he
knew it was against ANC policy.

Amid massive shows of public support, three cadres - Johnson Lubisi,
Petrus Mashigo, and Naphtali Manana - were sentenced to death for the
attack on the Soekmekaar police station, in which no one was killed; all
were found guilty of high treason and those not sentenced to death
received terms of 10 to 20 years.

Protest from a wide range of organisations and prominent personalities
ensued, and there were calls on the Pretoria regime to recognise the men
as prisoners of war. The UN Security Council sent an appeal "strongly
urging" the SA government to avoid further aggravating the situation and
to take into account "the concern expressed for the lives of these three
young people". Eventually their sentences were commuted to life
imprisonment. Many other cadres were not as fortunate.

6.2.6 Operations at cadres' initiative in response to state brutality

From around December 1985, and particularly during the period from April
1986 to September 1988, a number of attacks on civilian targets (such as
hotels and restaurants) with no connection to the state occurred. In some
cases MK cadres were responsible for such attacks, but in other cases
agents of the state carried out these actions in an attempt to damage the
image of the ANC in the eyes of the local and international community.

With regard to those attacks on "soft targets" for which MK personnel
were responsible, we do not seek to justify such attacks but insist that
the context in which they occurred is relevant: the growing
militarisation of every sphere of South African society and the massive,
unbridled violence unleashed by the apartheid state against black
civilians and anti-apartheid democrats in general.

The observation by then ANC President Tambo after the January 1981 attack
on ANC homes in Matola captures such anger succinctly:

"...there have never been any ANC bases or camps in Mozambique. There are
residences...and if the qualification to make a home a base is only that
the people in it can use a gun, then let us be told now: because every
white man in South Africa can use a gun and there are weapons in every
white household. Are these bases too?"

We have acknowledged earlier in our submission that in a number of
instances breaches in policy did occur, and deeply regret the loss of
life caused by operations of this nature. The leadership did assert
policy with regard to which targets were considered legitimate, and took
steps to halt operations in conflict with policy. We contend that in the
final analysis, the apartheid regime bears considerable responsibility
for creating a situation of pervasive state terrorism, in which people
tended to resort to increasingly violent and angry actions.

The case of the December 1985 blast in a shopping centre in Amanzimtoti
in which five people were killed, including eight year old Corne Smit,
and over 40 people injured, provides a clear example of the manner in
which the behaviour of the apartheid regime was a significant factor in
provoking certain attacks which were in breach of policy.

Andrew Sibusiso Zondo, aged 19, admitted to placing a bomb in a rubbish
bin in the Sanlam Centre in Amanzimtoti on December 23, 1985. He said he
had intended to blow up the South African Airways offices in the centre,
and had not intended to kill anyone. He had attempted to telephone a
warning from a public call box but this did not work.

Giving evidence, Zondo told the court that two incidents in 1981 marked a
turning point in his life: an unprovoked police attack on a prayer
service in KwaMashu during the schools boycotts, and the SADF raid on
three ANC residences in Maputo on January 30, 1981, in which twelve
people were killed. Of the attack on the KwaMashu gathering Zondo said:
"We were doing nothing but we found ourselves the victims of the police.
It made me ask myself why it had happened. From that day on, whenever I
looked at police I would see them as the enemy."

He was recruited into the ANC and finally decided to leave the country.

Andrew Zondo was trained in Angola between August 1983 and late 1985. Of
his experience in the camp, he stated that there were people of all
colours undergoing training at the camp, and "it was the best experience
I had in my life. I began to feel like a human being. I was not a native
or a kaffir". His training, said Zondo, emphasised that he should not
place civilians in danger.

After two years of training in Angola he returned to SA in late 1985. Of
this period Zondo said: "Our work went very well. We were very careful
about our targets. Our instructions were to avoid taking life and I
insisted on this instruction. Sometimes the other comrades got impatient
with me."

On December 20, 1985, the Pretoria regime launched a raid on Lesotho in
which nine people were killed; they denied all responsibility for these
murders (in which weapons with silencers were used), claiming the attacks
had been carried out by the "Lesotho Liberation Army". Among the dead
were Leon Meyer and Jackie Quinn, murdered in front of their infant
daughter, Phoenix. Quinn was not only not a member of the ANC, but was
not even a refugee - she travelled to South Africa regularly and could
have been arrested with no difficulty at all.

Zondo said he went to Amanzimtoti "for a target...a government
installation". He checked the local police station but found he could not
attack it on his own.

"Later in the day I found myself at the Sanlam Centre and went to the
Toti Restaurant to buy something to eat. (...) While I was eating I saw
people reading a newspaper which carried a picture of a woman shot in
Lesotho, the mother of a nine-month old baby. I bought the newspaper
myself.

"On returning home, I decided to go and put the mine in the centre. The
decision I took that day was racial in character because I had seen that
the area had a lot of white people. Before placing the mine I debated
over it. But on Monday I decided to do it, racial as it was. I knew the
people were innocent and had nothing to do with the government. I hoped
it would not injure them, but I hoped it would bring the government to
its senses."

Andrew Zondo spoke with unmistakably sincere regret for the deaths which
had occurred. Those responsible for the Lesotho massacre received medals
at a secret ceremony. On April 6, 1986, he was sentenced to death five
times, and refused leave to appeal. On being asked whether he had
anything to say before sentence was passed, Zondo stood up straight and
spoke clearly to the court: "I wish to say this to the people who might
have lost their friends, and kids and families, I say that I am sorry.
Next thing I wish that my country be friendly to its neighbouring
countries."

In an interview shortly after the Amanzimtoti blast, President Tambo said:

"Massacres have been perpetrated against civilians: Mamelodi, a massacre.
Uitenhage, a massacre. Botswana, a massacre. Queenstown, a massacre...
certainly, we are beginning see South Africans of all races (burying)
their loved ones who have died in the South African situation. The whole
of South Africa is beginning to bleed...If I had been approached by an
ANC unit and asked whether they should go and plant a bomb at a
supermarket I would have said, 'Of course not'. But when our units are
faced with what is happening all around them, it is understandable that
some of them should say, 'Well, I may have to face being disciplined, but
I am going to do this'."

6.2.7 Deliberate disinformation, leading to mistaken attacks

In a few cases deliberate disinformation resulted in attacks and
assassinations in which dedicated cadres lost their lives. In one of the
most painful examples of this nature, a state agent with the MK name of
"Fear" ordered two cadres to execute Ben Langa on the grounds that Langa
was an agent of the regime. These cadres - Clement Payi and Lucky Xulu -
carried out their orders. This action resulted in serious disruption of
underground and mass democratic structures in the area and intense
distress to the Langa family - which was the obvious intention of Fear's
handlers. Once the facts were known to the leadership of the ANC,
President Tambo personally met with the family to explain and apologise
for this action.

Xulu and Payi were arrested and executed: a triple murder had been
achieved by the apartheid regime without firing a single shot themselves.

6.2.8 "False flag" operations

In many cases which will come to the attention of the Commission, attacks
on civilians and civilian targets for which the ANC or other mass
democratic organisations were blamed were in fact the work of the
apartheid regime - what it called "false flag operations".

A few examples in this regard will suffice: in 1981 the former
Commissioner of Police, Johann Coetzee, lied to the public when he
claimed that the SAP were aware of the ANC's "dissatisfaction" with
Griffiths Mxenge's handling of funds sent to him from organisations
abroad, and were investigating allegations that he had misappropriated
funds. The clear inference was that the ANC was responsible for the
murder of Mxenge. This was carried out with perverted levels of brutality
by members of the covert Vlakplaas unit, indicative of the extent to
which the apartheid regime had dehumanised its own operatives. The
similarly depraved murders of Matthew Goniwe and his comrades were
ascribed to "UDF/Azapo conflict".

The 1987 KwaMakutha massacre provides another key example of the callous
manner in which civilians were slaughtered to achieve the political
objectives of the apartheid regime. Twelve women and children were killed
in this attack, portrayed as the work of "ANC terrorists" by Pretoria's
propaganda machinery. The ANC is convinced that this was part of an
attempt to derail a crucial meeting between ANC President OR Tambo and US
Secretary of State George Schultz - a meeting which was major
breakthrough in the continuing efforts to convince the international
community to refuse all support for the apartheid regime. Details on this
matter have been the subject of the Durban Trial on the KwaMakutha
massacre.

Former Minister of Law and Order Adriaan Vlok lied to the public when he
claimed the SAP suspected that "trained guerrillas" had been visiting the
South African Council of Churches headquarters (known as Khotso House)
and insinuated that this building had been used to store arms and
explosives. Shirley Gunn was accused of being responsible for the
destruction of the building by taking a car bomb onto the premises which
had exploded prematurely. As the public is now aware, it has been
asserted by former Vlakplaas operatives that this attack was undertaken
by them, and that Vlok in fact secretly congratulated the perpetrators of
this attack on church property.

The Trust Feed massacre, which resulted in the prosecution of police
officers is another example of a "false flag" operation: one of many
launched on ANC or IFP-supporting communities to precipitate or
perpetuate conflict in the KwaZulu/Natal Province. This factor is
relevant not only to the post-1990 period, but also to the pockets of
violence enduring in the province.

Certain attacks on civilians - including "necklacings" and attacks on a
cinema and restaurants - were in fact carried out by agents of the
apartheid state in their continuing attempts to damage the image of the
ANC. It is expected that further evidence in this regard will be
presented to the Commission.

6.2.9 People's Committees and Self-Defence Units (SDUs)

Over the years, much attention has been drawn to excesses and alleged
excesses committed by People's Committees and Self-Defence Units. In many
instances, such criticism was based on genuine concern on the part of
human rights activists and community leaders, who nevertheless
acknowledge the critical role that such committees and units played in
the face of the regime's terror. In other instances, though, allegations
regarding excesses were part of a deliberate propaganda campaign run by
the regime and its sympathisers to discredit the ANC, immobilise these
units, and conceal the state's own destabilising activities (as in "false
flag operations"). To understand the SDU phenomenon, it is necessary to
distinguish between units which had direct links with the ANC and those
which operated entirely outside the political ambit of the ANC.


6.2.9.1 Community self-defence initiatives (pre-1990)


As has been outlined earlier in our submission, in the mid-1980s the
apartheid state went on a full-scale offensive to crush democratic
organisations through a combination of formal and informal (i.e. covert
and largely illegal) measures which included unleashing extreme violence
on communities through surrogate "vigilante" groups.

Communities began to take measures to defend themselves through
establishing what were variously called defence committees, people's
militia or self-defence units.

To quote one instance, in May 1986 residents of Diepkloof, Soweto,
resolved to form people's militia in response to a series of violent
attacks on activists and their homes. On the weekend of May 2-3, 1986,
six people attending a night vigil were murdered and thirteen seriously
injured after being shot and hacked with pangas by about 40 men wearing
balaclavas.

The Soweto Civic Association issued a statement expressing concern that:

"the police, the SADF, councillors and their henchmen have been seen at
the scenes of petrol-bombings and other savage acts of brutality...we can
no longer stand idly by while our wives, children and property are being
attacked. We have no option but to defend ourselves and it is in this
context that we support the resolution taken by residents to form
self-defence units."

During the height of violence in the Pietermaritzburg area in 1987, in
which the state actively colluded with vigilantes, communities formed
defence units in every street of their residential areas. Attempts to
deal with the violence not only by means of armed defence but also
through establishing political structures in the form of multi-party
peace committees were set in motion.

Similar initiatives were taken in many other parts of the country - urban
and rural.


6.2.9.2 SDUs in the context of "Peoples War"


Particularly from 1983 onwards, the ANC emphasised the need to destroy
the administrative organs of the apartheid state as an essential element
in the all-round struggle to overthrow the Pretoria regime. With regard
to "ungovernability" and "people's power", it was made clear in many
statements and discussion documents that the strategic objective of
destroying apartheid-created organs of government was to pave the way for
establishing popular democratic institutions. The aim was to work towards
rendering the regime incapable of governing, and progressively replace
repressive institutions and unelected authorities with structures serving
the people.

The ANC actively encouraged initiatives of this nature on the part of the
people. In an interview broadcast on Radio Freedom in June 1986, in which
he assessed developments in the first six months of that year, President
Tambo referred to combat groups and self-defence units "mushrooming"
everywhere; and described these as important formations of the broad
popular army. He called on the people to:

"multiply the formation of people's defence militia everywhere so as to
meet more effectively the assault by the enemy's armed forces and the
treacherous vigilantes and impis...which they employ. Our people's army,
strengthened by the emerging popular militia, must intensify and spread
its armed actions across the country."

An extract from the ANC discussion document titled Broad Guidelines on
Organs of People's Power provides insight into the ANC's strategy at this
time, and the manner in which the development of a People's Army -
consisting of "layers" of cadres organised into Self-Defence Units,
Combat Units and MK officers - was conceived.

"The forms of armed actions and self-defence activity vary: the mass
revolutionary violence of the people; units to protect leaders of
people's committees and democratic organisations; a system of patrolling
the streets and warning signals; units to harass enemy patrols; attacks
on enemy encampments; elimination of agents; procurement of weapons and
so on.

"Each street should have a core of disciplined and trustworthy activists
to supervise this work, to plan for action and to strategise. The core
should have a tightly-knit structure...

"The Self-Defence Units and combat groups have to exercise initiative all
the time: in all their actions including procurement of weapons.
Secondly, these units are, above everything else, political units, guided
by the politics of the democratic movement and in particular the vanguard
formation, the ANC. Thirdly, the work they do should be systematic: they
should have a thorough knowledge of the area in which they operate; know
the enemy's bases, plans and movement; undertake actions suitable for the
political moment and their capacity. The guideline should be: Plan, Plan,
and Act according to Plan!"

With regard to the more militarily advanced and smaller combat units, it
was envisaged that these would be clandestine and consist only of "the
most disciplined, security conscious and politically advanced cadres",
some whom would be drawn from the self-defence units. These combat units
would link up with fully trained "professional" MK guerrillas or be
established with their assistance, and would be formally structured along
military lines. The idea was to continue upgrading the military skills of
these combat groups so that they would in time mature into fully-fledged
underground combat formations of MK.

The state took extreme measures to disrupt the formation of such units,
as in the case of booby-trapped hand grenades given to COSAS activists in
Duduza by an SAP agent posing as an MK soldier: several young people lost
their lives as the grenades exploded prematurely, and maimed survivors
were put on trial.

In so far as any excesses of those combat groups set up by, and SDU's
linked to, the ANC, these should be understood in the context of MK
operations as outlined in earlier sections.


6.2.9.3 SDUs in the context of Low-Intensity Warfare (LIW) during the
post-1990 negotiations phase


On August 6, 1990, the ANC formally committed itself to a cessation of
armed hostilities. In the same month, Inkatha launched itself as a
national political party; FW de Klerk repealed a century-old prohibition
on the public carrying of so-called "traditional weapons", and
unprecedented violence against African communities broke out in Reef
townships. Between late August and late September 1990, over 700
civilians had been massacred in attacks on homes, trains, and gatherings
such as funeral vigils.

The ANC recognised this violence for what it was: another version of the
"vigilantism" of the 1980s, a tactic aimed at strengthening the hand of
the government at the negotiations table through forcing a progressively
weakened ANC into a reactive position in which it would be held hostage
to the violence, and forced to make constitutional concessions.

By the end of the year, grassroots demands for protection against the
onslaught were intense. In November, the ANC Alliance published proposals
for the formation of organised and disciplined self-defence units guided
by political leadership in communities under attack with the aims of
protecting civilians and ensuring law and order in areas plagued with
violent crime.

These proposals, which were later compiled into a document titled For the
Sake of our Lives!, emphasised that political means to deal with violence
had to be sought and that campaigns to improve understanding between
communities were "imperative". Leadership figures who commented on the
proposals reiterated the need to make every effort to win over hostile
forces.

The need for avoiding party-political partisanship was strongly
emphasised; if such units were set up as

"armies of any political grouping or individual, without proper
consultation among the broadest possible range of organisations, would be
a prescription for 'Lebanonising' a conflict."

It was also recognised that highly disciplined and organised structures
were needed in order to guard against a repetition of past experiences in
which people had attempted to set up "loosely-formed defence units" which
had "degenerated into sectarian or personal power bases (For the Sake of
Our Lives).

By the end of 1990, at the time the ANC held its Consultative Conference,
pressure for the formation of SDUs had reached fever pitch: over 1,800
civilians had been killed in political violence since July. Resolutions
were passed to assist people in setting up accountable and non-partisan
SDUs and to establish peace committees with all political organisations,
in order to "preclude all violent confrontation and conflict that
emanates from the fact that people hold varying political views".

By April 1991 there had been no respite from the violence: over 2,400
civilians had been slaughtered, and the ANC announced an ultimatum:
unless certain actions were taken by the government to halt the
bloodshed, it would withdraw from the negotiations process. Serious
consideration was again given to the formal adoption of the programme
outlined in For the Sake of Our Lives!. The July 1991 48th National
Consultative Conference endorsed "without reservation" various peace
initiatives in process at the time, and reasserted the right of people to
self-defence: the incoming NEC was tasked with ensuring "that the
self-defence programme is put into action without undue delays."

President Nelson Mandela emphasised, at the 1991 National Conference of
the ANC:

"Where [MK] can, it must, of course, make its expertise available to
those communities that are engaged in the process of establishing
self-defence units".

Some members of MK Military HQ were tasked to attend to issues relating
to the SDU's, their organisation, training and the provision of weaponry.
It was, however, made clear that the overall control of SDUs was to
remain with community structures and MK cadres were to participate as
members of the community. MK Command was to play a secondary role.
Various clandestine units for the training and organisation of the
various SDUs were set up; and some cadres were tasked to provide weaponry
where possible.

The National Peace Accord recognised the legitimacy of self-defence
structures in communities under attack. By around September 1991, when
such units had been established in many areas affected by the violence,
there was a shift in tactics by those responsible for this campaign. On
the one hand, mobile specialist hit-squads increasingly took over the
work previously done by large groups of men usually indentifiable by
being aligned to Inkatha; the second major thrust of the state's
offensive to prevent SDUs from defending their communities was to
infiltrate and subvert SDUs through a variety of methods. Before long
there were two kinds of SDUs in existence: genuine community defence
groups, and violent gangs presenting themselves as ANC-aligned SDUs.

The deliberate subversion of SDUs by the De Klerk regime in order to
ensure that people could not mount sustained resistance to
state-sponsored violence, and to discredit the ANC in the eyes of
grassroots supporters and the international community is illustrated in
the case of the notorious Phola Park SDU.


6.2.9.4 A case study: the Phola Park SDU and the Directorate: Covert
Collection


The Phola Park Residents Committee was a democratically elected
structure, led by Prince Mhlambi, who was also head of the ANC branch in
this settlement. The Residents Committee took steps to set in motion
various ambitious community development projects, which were disrupted in
early 1992 when the Residents Committee was "overthrown" by an "SDU", led
by Mcungisi Ceba. Some of these new "leaders" claimed to be members of
MK, and began a reign of terror.

Under Ceba and his small band of "comrades", the Phola Park unit began
launching random attacks against the police, passing motorists and former
leaders of residents of the Phola Park. The most credible Phola Park
leaders were exiled from the settlement: three were murdered, including
Prince Mhlambi. Criminals moved into the settlement and joined the "SDU".
Violent confrontation between the Phola Park "SDU" and the police became
the order of the day, and attempts by the ANC to normalise the situation
were consistently frustrated by Ceba, who also always managed to evade
arrest in the constant police raids on the settlement in search of MK
cadres who were "perpetrating crimes against the police." Just before the
signing of the National Peace Accord in September 1992, members of the
Phola Park "SDU" opened fire on a crowd of Inkatha members, killing
sixteen people.

On November 11, 1992, the Goldstone Commission raided offices of the
SADF's Directorate: Covert Collection and seized various files. In a
press statement released on 16/11/92, the Commission stated that it had
found that Ferdi Barnard, a convicted murderer and former CCB member, was
employed by the Directorate: Covert Collection (DCC), and had written up
a project proposal in June 1991 for the task force he was to lead. His
group was to "specialise solely on the activities of Umkhonto we Sizwe
("MK")", and concentrate on discrediting MK by involving cadres in
criminal activities and syndicates. Where they could not be recruited,
the unit would aim to ensure they were "criminally compromised. For that
purpose use would be made, inter alia, of prostitutes, (...) and drug
dealers." Barnard's plan was submitted to senior MI officials and
approved.

On 17/11/92, the report on violence in the Thokoza area by a committee
established by the Goldstone Commission was published. This report
included an inquiry into the notorious Phola Park "SDU". There were
striking similarities between the DCC proposal to criminally compromise
MK members and the activities of this "SDU".

It was found that Ceba's "SDU", had been responsible for many criminal
acts including the assassination of the highly regarded community leader
Prince Mhlambi, and the attack on Inkatha members. Nearly all the actions
of this "SDU" were criminal in nature.

The Commission found that Mncugi Ceba was a police informer and that the
SAP "probably knew of the planned attack on hostel dwellers on 8
September", after which many other residents died in attacks and
counter-attacks set off by this massacre. An ANC member, Michael Phama,
was convicted of the murders of the Inkatha marchers, but Ceba was not
brought to trial.

The Goldstone Commission also found that there was no evidence at all
that MK was in any way involved with the establishment and command of
this "SDU", and in no way knew about or sanctioned its criminal
activities.


6.2.10 Managing the tension between ANC policy and mass pressures for
retaliatory action


We should again emphasise that there were ongoing debates within the
ranks of the ANC and MK about the narrow definition of legitimate
targets. In some instances, views on these matters were aired publicly.
As pointed out, this reflected the enduring tension between policy
pursued since the formation of MK, and pressure from cadres and the
masses for retaliatory action in response to state brutality. There were
cases in which senior ANC figures made comments which could be described
as creating a "grey area" with regard to which targets were considered
legitimate. However, the movement remained steadfast to its principles.

It should also be emphasised that the fact that all ANC literature was
banned by the regime made it difficult for the senior ANC leadership to
get through to cadres and activists on the ground with regard to policy
issues. Cadres were at all times subject to the mood and pressures from
the people they lived amongst, and given the sometimes tenuous command
and control links, policy could become diluted, or undermined.

Yet, senior MK commanders could testify to the fact that many targets
were not attacked specifically because too many civilian casualties would
occur. A unit which reconnoitred the Mobil Oil refinery in Durban in the
late 1970s reported that it would be unwise to carry out an attack as the
installation was too close to civilians living around the refinery, who
would be endangered by gas exploding over their residential area.

The decision not to go ahead with an attack on PW Botha's cabinet during
the 1981 Republic Day celebrations in Bloemfontein referred to earlier
provides another example. Before the attack on Koeberg was approved, the
ANC went to the trouble of employing reliable nuclear experts in Europe
to determine without any shadow of doubt that there would be no danger to
civilians as a result of the explosions.

As indicated earlier, this steadfast commitment to policy was put to the
test in the 80s during the high noon of state repression. As the "Burger
War" (attacks on Wimpy Bars and supermarkets) seemed to become a trend,
President Tambo ordered a special meeting of the PMC and the whole of MHQ
to debate and restate policy on the issue of targets. While a number of
such attacks may have originated from MK cadres, evidence has started to
surface that some of them were in fact "false flag operations" of the
state: and for the lives lost on the altar of discrediting the ANC, those
responsible should account to this Commission.

In virtually all instances where there was a violation of policy by MK
cadres, disciplinary action was taken. In some cases commanders and
operatives were recalled from the country and sent back to training
camps. In rare cases, cadres became undisciplined and flouted all the
rules by attacking personal enemies or getting involved in violent
conflict in public places such as shebeens. In one case an MK cadre
killed two people in a Soweto shebeen; he is currently serving a life
sentence and the ANC has not called for his release on political grounds.

The TRC should also note that in many of the instances, the cadres
responsible for some of these actions were arrested, tortured and
sentenced to long terms of imprisonment. We submit that natural justice
should be taken into account when matters pertaining to their cases are
considered.


6.3 Excesses in relation to state agents


6.3.1 Context of security and intelligence operations

Security and intelligence structures of the ANC were established within
the context of its adoption of underground forms of struggle. Any
underground movement requires relevant mechanisms to protect those
involved in it; to acquire information from the repressive state about
its intentions and strategies; to carry out reconnaissance work for
operations, and so on. At the same time it was crucial for the movement
to ensure that its ranks were not infiltrated by agents of the regime, or
at least, to minimise the damage that such infiltration would wreak.

During the 1950s it had become clear that the regime had begun to
systematically infiltrate ANC structures in order to gather information,
and also in order to deploy agents provocateurs tasked with undertaking
actions that would discredit the ANC and create a basis for repressive
actions against it. The acts of provocation during the Defiance Campaign
in Port Elizabeth, and the so-called "Shisa-Shisa" gang in Kimberly
during that period are examples of this approach. The use of agents
became obvious too during the Treason Trial between 1956 and 1960.

This trend intensified in the early 1960s, as the intelligence and
security arms of the regime were revamped with the formation of
Republican Intelligence which later became BOSS, and the consolidation of
the Security Branch of the SAP.

Such infiltrators were given various tasks. Often they were part of the
regime's covert intelligence gathering machinery - moles to keep the
regime informed on ANC strategies, tactics, intentions and the activities
of leaders. Operational intelligence would also be gathered also in order
to locate leaders and to accumulate evidence to be used against them in
trials. Later, such operational information would be used to prepare for
assassinations, the capture and murder of operatives, attacks on homes or
ANC installations, and so on.

At other times, infiltrators were able to influence the plans adopted by
underground cells or MK units with disasterous consequences - such as the
unwitting deployment of cadres along routes previously agreed to with
their handlers in the apartheid security forces. In other cases,
information on the location of arms caches was passed on; at times
weapons would be booby-trapped and replaced in the caches, resulting in
fatal injuries to those who later retrieved and attempted to use them.

Most casualties among leaders and activists both within and outside the
country derived from such infiltration, be it the MK High Command in
Rivonia, leaders of the Black Consciousness Movement and trade unions in
the early 70s, and more massively after the 1976 uprising.

There were various methods of recruitment. Special indoctrination centres
were used to train prospective infiltrators in the policies of the ANC,
its mode of operation, and to prepare them for various missions,
including ingratiating themselves with the leadership in order to be
deployed in responsible positions; in other cases captured combatants,
underground operatives or activists would, under brutal torture, be given
the option of certain death or working for the regime. Psychological
harassment was common, aimed at making cadres lose confidence in the
leadership and the struggle. Blackmail was also used. In many cases,
people facing probable conviction for criminal activities were offered
the option of working for the regime instead of prison sentences.

Building on its small underground security and intelligence structures of
the early 1960s, the ANC set up a fully-fledged Security Department in
1969, tasked with the physical protection of the ANC human and material
resources and the screening of new recruits. As the mass revolt to take
root within the country, these tasks were broadened to include protection
of the MDM leadership, and gathering such information as would help to
protect the people as a whole.

With the influx of new recruits in the wake of the June 16 1976 uprising,
and the ANC's realisation that the regime planned to thoroughly
infiltrate the ANC, extra steps had to be taken to strengthen the ANC's
security structures and to devise ways of handling captured agents.

Attempt to re-educate culprits and win them over to the people's cause
formed the basis of the ANC's policy with regard to captured infiltrators.

An elaborate and excruciating process followed, premised on the moral
superiority of the anti-apartheid struggle. Compared to other struggles,
including anti-colonial liberation wars and resistance movements during
World War II, this was out of the ordinary - and in many instances would
astound our allies and hosts.

At the beginning, the ANC was faced with the real constraint that it was
operating from abroad, with weak underground structures within the
country and a mass movement that was only starting to emerge. This was to
change when the situation improved, and it became easier to screen new
recruits, using the wide network that the ANC and the MDM had established
within the country.

In contrast to these difficult conditions, the regime had at its disposal
a well-resourced apparatus, budgeted to the tune of billions of Rands a
year, and spread over at least three arms of the state: the police, the
SADF and civilian intelligence. Later, when the National Security
Management System was put into operation, the entire apparatus of the
state was geared towards security and intelligence work - both
operational and strategic - at the political, propaganda and narrow
security levels. The basic paradigm of these machineries was to destroy
everything connected to the ANC, and all structures sympathetic to the
struggle against apartheid.

Given these circumstances, the ANC wishes to submit that it conducted
itself well: above all, by ensuring the survival of a liberation movement
which, at the beginning, had everything stacked against it; by returning
from exile with a solid and united organisation; by foiling assassination
plots which would have deprived the ANC, the MDM and the country as a
whole of the crop of leaders who which not only led the all-round
struggle of the past three decades, but also helped steer South Africa
through the extremely difficult transition we have, as a nation,
accomplished with such distinction.

Yet we do acknowledge that, in the context of this work, excesses
occured. This section will outline the circumstances under which they
happened, and the evolution of ANC policy to deal with problems of this
nature. Part of this submission are the reports of the Stuart, Skweyiya
and Motsuenyane Commissions, as well as the report of the inquest into
the death of Thami Zulu. Given the thoroughness with which these
commissions pursued their work, this section of our submission will not
repeat the details of these reports, but will identify major landmarks of
relevance to the specific brief of the commission.

6.3.2 Structures of accountability

The ANC's National Executive Committee (NEC) is the most senior executive
structure in the ANC, and as such was responsible for and establishing
the overall political framework in which all ANC structures operate,
including the Department of National Security and Intelligence.

The next most senior structure after the NEC was the National Working
Committee, responsible for the day-to-day running of the ANC at NEC
level. The Offices of the President, Secretary-General and
Treasurer-General fell under the NEC and NWC. Under the President's
Office were the National Security Council, and after 1985, the Review
Board and the Office of Justice. The National Security Council consisted
of the President, the Secretary-General, the Treasurer General and the
head of the Security and Intelligence Department. Military HQ, Political
HQ and sections of the Department of National Security and Intelligence
(also known as NAT) fell under the PMC.

NAT was headed by a Directorate composed of the heads of the various
sub-sectors of this structure: Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence,
Processing or the Central Intelligence Evaluation Sector, Security, and
VIP Protection. The overall head of the Department was appointed by the
President

Beneath the National PMC there were regional PMC's co-ordinating the work
of units inside the country, composed of political, military and security
personnel. Security units reported to a regional NAT directorate.

In what were considered Military Zones such as Angola (and later Uganda),
virtually all the structures pertaining to cadre settlements fell under
the PMC. Camps fell under a Camp Commander, with the second-in-command
being the Camp Commissar; next in seniority were the Chiefs-of-Staff,
Ordnance, Logistics, with the Recording Officer (from NAT) and guards
making up the rest of the camp administration.

Structures to improve the accountability of NAT and to address abuses
which had arisen were introduced at the time of the Kabwe Conference in
1985. The Kabwe Conference agreed to adopt a Code of Conduct, which
entailed setting in place a range of regulations to govern conduct within
the ANC, and three new structures were established: the Officer of
Justice; the National People's Tribunal; and the National Review
Committee, which are dealt with in more detail in section 6.3.4.2. It was
decided to restructure the Department and define its role more clearly;
its activities were confined to the screening and investigation of
recruits, and the collection of intelligence. Reports on persons
suspected of unlawful activities or of being agents had to be handed to
the Officer of Justice, whose duties included ensuring that
investigations were carried out fairly.

A Commission was appointed to examine problems in the Department, and
make recommendations regarding the future leadership.

Secrecy is in the nature of the work of all intelligence organisations,
with the "need-to-know" principle providing one of the first lines of
defence in the protection of information. It is also in the nature of
such work that this reality can lend itself to the abuse of power,
particularly in periods of heightened offensive by the enemy. Recognising
this, the changes introduced by the ANC in the leadership of this
Department, along with the establishment of structures to deal with all
cases of human rights abuses within the organisation, and to act as
checks against any misuse of power by the Department, were in line with
continuing attempts by the ANC to narrow the scope for abuse and to
ensure that justice prevailed.

6.3.3 Stages of security operations and experiences


6.3.3.1 A new paradigm in the context of mass revolt and mass exodus
(1976 -1980)


In the period before the watershed of June 1976, the underground
structures of the ANC deliberately recruited cadres for training and
deployment within the country. The new phase after the upheavels of 1976
saw the mass exodus of youth, seeking contact with the ANC driven by the
desire to acquire the skills necessary to respond to the brutality of the
regime with military force. It was critical for the ANC to set up the
necessary structures to process all these new recruits: for ensuring
proper deployment of cadres; for utilising information they passed on to
the ANC, which could be used to build the underground; and to ensure that
agents of the regime were weeded out.

Though many of the new arrivals were known to one another, the ANC did
not have a sufficiently developed network within the country to
cross-check information they provided. A contributing factor was the
difficult situation in which the ANC had to operate incertain frontline
states as an underground outfit with few resources. In most instances, it
had to rely on the bona fides of the new recruits.

At times, the regime would demonstrate a callous disregard particularly
for its black agents by sending them en masse into ANC structures in
exile, without much preparation and with little chance of escaping the
clearance net. This, however, was also part of a red herring approach, to
conceal its better trained agents and keep the ANC's security structures
busy on inconsequential cases.

Some agents were exposed because they were known within the country.
Others were naive and inconsistencies in their biographies which all
recruits had to write were easily spotted. However, some were
well-trained in the fields of political, military, and intelligence work.
This included briefings on how to aim at being deployed in certain
positions of strategic importance, how to rise within the ranks of the
ANC, how to identify key moments at which agitation against the
leadership could serve to undermine the ANC, how to gather information
for necessary assassinations and other attacks, or to carry out such
deeds themselves. A number of these agents were able to escape the
clearance net, and were only discovered later.

The ANC's approach to those who were discovered was based on its policies
to convert them to liberation politics. Besides, these individuals stood
out as pitiful "square pegs" who needed help rather than maltreatment.
For their own protection and in order to ensure the safety of others,
most of these agents were placed in safe houses, and, in terms of food
and other supplies, treated no differently from the rest of the new
recruits. However, there were some who had been briefed to link up with
counter-revolutionary groups or agents already deployed in the host
countries; these agents were processed in conjunction with host
governments and then transferred to local prisons.

Before mid-1977, there was little visable activity by agents beyond a few
attempts to carry out their missions and the escape of some who were able
to report back to their handlers. After this tentative period, the
network became highly active.In September 1977, food was poisoned at the
Catengue military training camp in Angola, the only major training centre
of MK. Nearly 500 trainees were affected and had it not been for the
timely action of doctors, most would have died, or have been finished off
in their weakened state by these agents. The perpetrators of this crime
were discovered some years later.

In 1979, the regime launched an air raid on the same camp. The timing and
choice of targets indicated clearly that they had precise information on
the outlay of, and routine in, the camp. Fortunately, the ANC had prior
knowledge of the regime's intentions, and the camp had been evacuated.

UNITA and FNLA bandits began to target MK camps and convoys. Again some
of these attacks indicated that they had inside information about the
camps and movements of our units. Several casualties among cadres
deployed within the country indicated that thee had to be agents within
certain commanding structures of MK.

It was during this period that the Security and Intelligence Department
was consolidated; new recruits were trained and deployed, and in 1979 , a
formal detention centre was established at Camp 32 in Angola.


6.3.3.2 Covert operations intensify (1981 - 1985)


In 1981, efforts to destabilise the ANC began to take on the form of
overt agitation against the leadership, particularly in Lusaka. In the
camps, there was a rash of bizarre incidents of indiscipline by a
minority of cadres - such as running dagga rings, the theft and sale of
camp equipment and weapons, and the rape and murder of Angolan villagers.
Attempts were made to deal with these developments politically, and to
determine the root causes of the problems. At the time the ANC was not
aware of the role of the regime's network in these developments, and in
any case, they were exploiting real grievances and difficulties.

The network was discovered with the arrest of a group of these agents in
1981; the leadership at HQ was shocked at the extent of infiltration, as
their links in Lusaka, Angola, Tanzania and further afield was uncovered.

The "spy network"

In 1981, a cadre named Ndunga (codename "Joel Mahlatini") was allegedly
involved in dealing in dagga while posted at Pango Camp. The camp
commander, whose MK name was Kenneth Mahamba, ordered cadres to beat him
and authorised his detention in Camp 32, but Ndunga was certified dead on
arrival at the detention centre. The ANC regional command instituted an
investigation into this act of brutality; the findings were profoundly
shocking.

Kenneth Mahamba had been recruited by the Security Police in 1976, and
was linked to an extensive network of agents. Some of these agents had
been groomed for deep and long-term penetration of the ANC, and had
through exemplary behaviour attained highly responsible positions. Others
had been given less complex but nevertheless highly damaging tasks by
their SB handlers such as poisonings and sabotage of valuable equipment.
Along with agents whose MK names were Thabo Mavuso, Rodgers Mayalo,
Justice Tshabalala (a member of the ANC's security department), Tommy
Shenge (physical instructor at the camp), Pharoah Mogale, and Vusi
Mayekiso, Kenneth Mahamba had been involved in the poisoning of cadres at
Nova Catengue camp and passing on intelligence which led to the
destruction of the camp in the 1979 aerial bombardment.

In addition to attempting to murder cadres and passing on intelligence on
military installations, this network and its various subsidiaries
supplied information on the movements of leadership figures; carried out
surveillance on ANC residences; sent the enemy detailed information on
the children studying at Mazimbu and committed various acts of sabotage.
Some operatives had been tasked to deliberately encourage indiscipline
and stir up discontent through tactics such as the promotion of tribalism
in camps.

The network had included the key operative Thabo Mavuso, who had been the
Commissar at Catengue camp. When he was sent back into the country he
immediately reported to his handlers, and became the first Askari.
Pharoah Mogale had been a political instructor at the camp, and was later
deployed to the Youth Secretariat at HQ in Lusaka. Another operative was
Oshkosh Khumalo, an immigration official who had been sending information
on all cadres passing from Zambia to South Africa, leading to many
arrests and murders. The network included Section Commander Escom
Maluleka, a member of the ANC's treasury department Balili Mpila and
several other agents, including Angolan nationals, and operatives located
in various neighbouring countries. Some members of the network had been
transporting MK recruits from inside the country to forward areas. Others
were working for foreign police and intelligence services which were
co-operating with the apartheid regime. Several members of this network
were executed after their cases had been heard by a Tribunal.

It must be emphasised that some cadres who were arrested at this time
were either falsely implicated, or had merely shown signs of
ill-discipline. Many of them were later released;. Apologies were
tendered for wrongful arrest, and they were reintergrated into the exile
community, and in some cases provided with opportunities to pursue
academic studies.


6.3.3.3 Some incidents of abuse


The discovery of this network of agentsand the missions that they had
been pursuing within the movement came as a shock: while infiltration had
been expected, the sophisticated nature and the extent of the network was
beyond what anyone had imagined. It was clear that the leadership and the
movement as a whole, had escaped by the skin of its teeth.

It is within this context that the work of the Department of National
Security and Intelligence intensified - it was a matter literally of life
or death. But this department was largely staffed by young cadres; faced
with this new situation and aware of the threat posed to the ANC, and at
times having to deal with agents who refused to divulge information
despite geing confronted with prima facie evidence, some of these cadres
seriously abused detainees.

These excesses are detailed in the reports of the Motsuenyane and
Skweyiya Commissions reports. These reports must read with the evidence
that members of NAT submitted to both Commissions. It is clear that:
some of the allegations of abuse are accurate, but others are exaggerated
or entirely false, and represent deliberate attempts to mislead the
Commissions; while certain cadres deployed as guards in detention centres
may be directly responsible for these excesses in their zeal to deal with
what they understood as the most critical threat in the history of the
ANC, the leadership of NAT did not sufficiently intervene to correct the
situation. The head of the Department at the time, Mzwai Piliso, accepted
full responsibility for this in his evidence to the Motsuenyane
Commission; when information on the conditions in detention centres
reached senior organs of the ANC, lengthy meetings were held by the NEC
to asses the situation and introduce corrective measures. The report of
the Stuart Commission Report is relevant as was noted in the NEC
statement in response to the release of the Motsuenyane Report.

"Violations of human rights must always be condemned, no matter by who,
against whom. It is especially painful for us that the heroism of our
combatants in exile should be tarnished by such unacceptable and tragic
episodes as are revealed in the Motsuenyane Commission Report. Our
movement has always held that the standard by which we judge ourselves
has never been the same as the apartheid regime's. We therefore
appreciate the fact that the Commission has judged us by the highest
standards, according to internationally accepted norms".

The ANC deeply regrets the excesses that occurred. Further, we
acknowledge that the real threat we faced and the difficult conditions
under which we had to operate led to a drift in accountability and
control away from established norms, resulting in situations in which
some individuals within the NAT began to behave as a law unto themselves.


6.3.3.4 Detention - the case of the Morris Seabelo Centre:


There have been many allegations regarding conditions in the Morris
Seabelo Centre, variously refereed to as Camp 32 or Quadro.

The government in Angola made it clear that it would prefer the ANC to
manage its own centre, rather than be saddled with cases it could not
process.

The conditions in this detention centre have been described in some
detail in the reports of the Commissions which we have appended to our
submission. Because these conditions have been described with no
reference to the overall situation under which Mk had to operate in
Angola, it is necessary to describe the situation in the training camps
in more detail. These reminiscences of a former commander are relevant.

"Conditions in any military establishment are very difficult and
abnormal. Countries that hosted MK were themselves underdeveloped without
the necessary infrastructure for their own population, let alone
guerrilla camps. Most of them, especially Angola, were under perpetual
aggression from the apartheid regime. Poverty, disease, lack of
facilities and other privations were the order of the day. MK camps were
not immune from this; and they relied on food mainly from donors.

"Such supplies were never adequate. The main food supplies were beans,
maize-meal, rice, flour, powdered eggs and canned food. More often than
not, these supplies did not arrive at the same time to allow for a
"wholesome meal". For instance, for months on end only beans would be
available, or only beans and powdered eggs - one meal a day would be
cooked powdered eggs and beans, or just beans.

"Most of the camps were hundreds of kilometres away from Luanda and other
ports. And attacks by anti-government bands would target precisely these
supply lines. All cadres therefore experienced serious dietary problems.

"Hospitals, especially in Angola, were mainly situated in the cities. MK
camps, all-in-all with a minimum of about 1 200 cadres at any one time,
relied for many years on one qualified doctor and a few poorly-trained
medical orderlies. This doctor, Nomava Ntshangase, was herself killed in
a truck accident, under circumstances that remain mysterious to this day.

"Medical supplies depended on the donors, and much of these supplies were
of no use in combating the diseases prevalent in the camps. Cadres fell
victim to malaria and other tropical diseases, and a number died".

It is under these conditions that all cadres lived for many years in MK
camps in Angola. When the evidence on conditions in detention centres is
considered, it must be weighed against this background.

However, to the extent that conditions in some of the detention centres
might have been much worse than the norm, the ANC acknowledged, that
things needed to be improved and steps were taken to do so.


6.3.3.5 Tension and dissatisfaction - dealing with mutiny


Several factors combined to produce dissatisfaction and tension among
cadres in the camps: generally difficult conditions; the behaviour of
some security personnel; and the slow pace of deployment of cadres within
the country, given the different modus operandi of MK in comparison to
other guerrilla struggles. In addition to these problems, MK combatants
had been killed by bandits seeking to destabilise the Angolan government.
Operations bordering on military campaigns had to be conducted to clear
areas around MK camps.

These conditions resulted in protests in late 1983 and early 1984 in
camps near the town of Cangandala, which were defused with no loss of
life.But dissatisfaction continued amongst these cadres and others who
had by this time been moved to Viana transit camp, and some refused to
turn in their arms on arrival. This mutiny was put down with the
assistance of Angolan government troops and resulted in the loss of two
lives, an MK cadre known as "Babsy" and an Angolan soldier who was killed
when an Armed Personnel Carrier was shot at by Dyasop, an MK cadre.
Fortunately there was no further loss of life and the mutineers
surrendered their arms. Like all other armies, MK had rules about dealing
with mutineers, and this case was no exception. The leaders of this
mutiny, popularly known as Mkatashinga, were arrested, many of them were
later released.

A far more serious mutiny broke out in Pango in 1984. Those responsible
used machine-guns and other heavy weapons to kill the camp commanders and
other soldiers, this mutiny had to be be suppressed mercilessly. A
military tribunal was set up by the NEC and two groups of mutineers were
tried: seven of those who shot officers and other cadres were given the
death penalty. None of the second group of eight were executed, despite
the fact that one of the mutineers had hunted down wounded cadres the
morning after the mutiny began, and finished them off: The ANC released
him but he later murdered a Tanzanian citizen and was imprisoned in that
country.

There were isolated cases in which recruits were executed after they were
tried and convicted of crimes such as raping and murdering local
villagers. For example, Thabo Makhubethe (travelling name Ruphus
Maphalie) was found guilty of raping an Angolan woman. A military
tribunal ordered that he be executed by firing squad - sentence was
carried out in 1984 in Luanda. In another case, Josiah Malhobane
(travelling name Shaka Dumakude) and Jeremiah Maleka (travelling name
Zweni Mdingi) indulged in heavy drinking in Milange and neglected the
important assignments they had been given. In a drunken state they
randomly shot at shoppers at a local market, killing two Angolan women
and seriously injuring another woman and child. They were sentenced to
death by firing squad - sentence was carried out in 1989 at Milange.

The full list of people executed during the years of exile is attached to
this submission.


6.3.3.6 Political leadership and the judicial system


From reports of the Regional Command in Angola, as well the security
department, the NEC was appraised of the gravity of the security
situation, and was advised on decisions that would have to be taken
regarding those captured. The work that the security structures had
accomplished was, however, not matched by an equal enthusiasm to ensure
humane conduct by the people responsible for arrests and detention
centres. The NEC emphasised the need for cadres in security structures to
operate within the ambit of movement policy; some of them did visit the
detention centres to ensure that this happened, but not enough was done
to prevent the reoccurence of abuses.

However, when reports about dissatisfaction precipitating mutinies were
received, and when decisions were required about appropriate sentences,
the NEC acted swiftly. Senior NEC members were dispatched to ensure that
the tribunals were conducted in a fair manner and that cases where
execution was recommended were reviewed impartially.

The NEC realised that these reports reflected a more serious malaise; and
a Commission of Inquiry headed by James Stuart which including senior
non-NEC members such as Sizakhele Sigxashe, were tasked with
investigating the causes of the mutinies and recommending measures to
correct the situation.

The Commission Report, which is one of the appendices, acknowledged the
problems and proposed political, administrative, logistical and other
measures to rectify the situation. By the time the report was released,
one of the recommendations - for a national conference of the movement -
was already being organised, Issues raised by the Commission raised
informed debate at the 1985 Kabwe Conference.

6.3.4 Post-Kabwe: Consolidation of ANC jurisprudence (1985 - 1987)


6.3.4.1 Debates on the treatment of captured agents


We have described the enduring tension between the ANC's policy on
legitimate targets, and pressure for retaliation in response to state
brutality. There were similarly heated debates within the movement on the
treatment of captured agents. On the one hand, there was ANC policy on
the humane treatment of prisoners of war, ie accordance with the Geneva
Protocols; on the other, there was the anger at the havoc certain agents
had wrought. As a result of their activities, cadres had been arrested
inside the country; leaders such as Joe Gqabi, Dulcie September and
Cassius Make had been assassinated, along with many others in exile and
inside the country; ANChouses had been attacked, cadres poisoned, and
valuable equipment had been sabotaged.

The question would be posed over and over again, were we not being too
lenient in keeping such agents in settlements, feeding them and "wasting"
resources onguarding them? But as always, the movement eschewed emotional
responses and sought to approach matters rationally, asserting the
supremacy of the ANC's politics and morality. While not enough was done
in earlier years to ensure that these policies informed actual practice,
humane norms governing the treatment of captured agents remained ANC
policy.

At the Kabwe Conference, this matter came under intense scrutiny; and the
result was not merely the reassertion of policy, but also the adoption of
an elaborate Code of Conduct to ensure that the policies of the movement
found clearer expression in actual practice. The Code set out standards
for the treatment of detainees, emphasising that all its cadres,
particularly those working in the field of security, should be trained
accordingly, and that in its conduct, the movement should nurture "the
embryo of the new justice system we envisage for a liberated South
Africa".

In Section C of the Code of Conduct, titled "Investigation", sub-section
(4) stipulates that "Torture or any form of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment of a detainee or of a person on trial is forbidden," with this
stipulation further reinforced by the regulations listed under Section D:
"Procedure", sub-section (8b), which states that "the Tribunal shall at
all times be attentive to the necessity to ensure that any confession or
admission is genuine and that its content can be relied upon, and should
normally not make a finding of guilty without some external and
substantial form of corroboration."

In the section titled "Punishment" in the MK Code of Conduct , it is
stipulated that "all members of the ANC and MK are required to respect
the terms of the Geneva Convention on the Treatment of Prisoners of War
in line with the formal acceptance by the ANC of these terms in 1981. Any
violation of these terms shall be an offence. ( ...) The purpose of
punishment is to deter members from committing an offence, assist
offenders to rehabilitate (...) Punishments shall be administered
humanely and without undue harshness or cruelty."


6.3.4.2 Structures for justice


The Code of Conduct called for the establishment of the post of Officer
of Justice whose functions included ensuring that there was no abuse of
persons in detention, that the goal of re-education prevailed, and that
unreasonable delays in finishing investigations were avoided.

In addition, a Review Commission was consolidated, to ensure that
sentences decided on by tribunals or any other structures would be
examined by senior members of the NEC.

Despite the limited resources at the ANC's disposal, lawyers within the
movement were tasked to ensure that those who were tried had a proper
defence. Not only was this process excruciatingly difficult for an
underground movement given the conditions under which the ANC had to
operate, it also generated tension between various structures and
individuals within the movement - all in defence of normal practices of
justice, and not seldom, in the service of agents responsible for heinous
acts against the people.

But the NEC insisted that this was the right course, and temptations to
violate or undermine the rules were discouraged.


6.3.4.3 Revamp of Security and Intelligence Department and new culture


President Tambo decided to restructure the Department and bring in new
personnel. Between 1986-7 a provisional Directorate was formed under the
supervision of the Sg, Alfred Nzo. This Provisional Sdirectorate was
tasked with restructuring the department in order to ensure its practices
were in line with the new structures for justice established after the
Kabwe Conference , investingating the style of work within the
department, and assessing its ability to respond to the changed
circumstances of struggle within the country and in the international
arena.

A new leadership of the department consisting of senior members of the
NEC, was appointed in 1987. The Department was restructured into more
clearly defined sub-sectors of Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence,
Processing and Security. The new leadership set about correcting other
problems within the department, It tightened supervision of interrogation
practices, and acted immediately against unnacceptable methods;
systematically investigated conditions in the detention centres, and
proposed corrective measures where appropriate. Plans were drawn up for a
new detention centre in Angola, but before work could begin the majority
of ANC cadres, detainees and prisoners had to be transferred to Uganda
and Tanzania, where conditions were better.

The Thami Zulu case

Among the cases that have received much publicity in this period is the
recall and confinement of Thami Zulu and the issue of circumstances
surrounding his death. The details are sufficiently covered in the report
of the Commission which was tasked with investigating the case.(the
report is one of the appendicies). In order to fully understand the
actual meaning of this case, both to appreciate the past and identify
current and future challenges, the following issues need to be underlined:

* Investigations into the extremely high casualty rate within Mk
  structures under his command were accepted as constituting sufficient
  ground for his recall; within the context of international military
  norms, commanders under similar circumstances have been subjected to
  far worse treatment.
* Thami Zulu was not confined to a detention centre. He spent most of
  his time in residences, although separated from the rest of the ANC
  community. At no time was he tortured or subject to any undue pressure.
* When he was released, Thami Zulu was ill Independent pathologists
  found he had contracted the HIV virus and was suffering from
  AIDS-related Complex, and possibly pulmonary TB.
* However, Thami Zulu died of poisoning after his release - and to this
  day, it is a matter of conjecture as to who administered this poison
  and why this was done. The Department of Intelligence and Security has
  reason to believe that an agent or agents of the regime were
  responsible.

As in other cases, such as those of Francis Meli and Solly Smith, the
question has been asked whether poison was administered to stop him from
exposing deeper networks, on his death-bed, embedded in the movement. We
hope that the TRC process will help to uncover the real facts the case of
Thami Zulu and other such complex cases.


6.3.4.4 A new capacity in the underground


In time underground structures of the ANC, including security and
intelligence units, struck root within the country; assisted by the MDM
network throughout the country, it was easier to follow up accusations,
investigate suspicious tendencies, and seek advice from cadres on the
ground.

Many of the agents captured in this period were known to underground and
MDM structures before they left the country; and when challenged with
irrefutable evidence, they would have no option but to admit their guilt.

In addition, the Security and Intelligence Department developed networks
within the regime's security structures, and valuable information on
infiltration of the ANC and MDM was obtained in this manner. The ANC was
able to identify the controllers activities of over 600 agents - in exile
and deployed in internal ANC and MDM structures - from details of reports
they had submitted to their handlers. Three cases illustrate this new
intelligence capacity, and details of some of their reports (not
necessarily accurate, but in the words of the agents or their handlers)
are attached to this submission:

Maxwell Xulu (Report 1):

A former Treasurer-General of COSATU, his Security Police Source Number
was PN645. He was controlled by Warrant Officers Brown and Twala of the
Port Natal region. He submitted 23 reports, in which he is described as a
"high level source holding a senior position in the labour movement" and
having "high level contact with the leadership of the ANC in exile". He
had penetrated COSATU, MAWU, NUMSA, the ANC and the UDF. Confronted with
this damning evidence, Xulu conceded his guilt and agreed to leave the
trade union movement.

Keith McKenzie (Report 2):

A former operative in an underground MK unit, his Security Police Source
Number was NT395. He was controlled by Lt. Momberg and Sgt. Goosen of the
Northern Transvaal region. He is said to have submitted one report on
contact he had with MK commanders in Botswana, and was characterised as a
"high level source associated with leading members of the ANC MK Special
Operations Group". McKenzie was apprehended by the ANC, and confirmed the
information contained in the report.

Joy Harnden (Report 6):

"A high level source placed in the white left of the UDF structures", her
Security Police Number was WWR 805, she was handled by Lt Palko of the
Witwatersrand police. She is said to have submitted 6 reports. After
making contact with underground structures in Maputo, she was put in
touch with a unit inside the country. The leader of this unit was Iggy
Mathebula, disappeared without trace after making contact with her. To
this day, it is not known what happened to Iggy Mathebula, and we hope
the TRC will discover the truth. The MDM was warned of her activities and
she was excluded from their structures.

The moral of this information is that, besides the culture established in
the revamped security structures of the ANC, it had become much easier to
deal with accusations against individuals within the ANC, MDM and other
organisations. Thus was no pressure to resort to harsh methods in order
to establish the facts and extract information. Of course, there were
other networks (apart from those indicated in the attached Security
Branch reports) linked to Military Intelligence and the National
Intelligence Service - and the TRC should help uncover these facts.

6.3.5 Some cases relevant to the post-1990 period

As the negotiations process opened, the ANC began to process captured
agents for release and repatriation. A few years earlier, the ANC had
sought to send some of these agents back to their handlers in exchange
for cadres of the movement in state hands; but for propaganda reasons,
and because they cared little for their own operatives, the regime had
refused.

Of those released in 1990, several expressed remorse for their activities
against the ANC and the struggle, and maintain friendly contact with the
ANC. They have communicated their wish to be rehabilitated and fully
reintegrated into society, and the ANC is doing all it can to assist.
There are others who were wrongfully arrested. The ANC has apologised to
them, and where possible has assisted them to re-establish themselves
within the country; some are pursuing their studies. To them we once more
apologise.

However, there are a number of agents who came back and were quickly
reintegrated into the security apparatus of the regime. Two cases clearly
demonstrate the character of these agents.


6.3.5.1 De Sousa - gang criminality and apartheid security


Joachim Jose Ribiero de Sousa was among the last group of detainees
released by the ANC. He had been recruited by the NIS in the USA in 1983,
where he was studying for a BSc degree. He reported on the activities of
anti-apartheid groups in the USA, and after training in Pretoria passed
on information on UDF campaigns against the tri-cameral Parliament. He
also passed on information on ANC offices in New York, London, Lusaka and
Harare. He was detained by ANC security in 1986.

De Sousa's group returned to South Africa in August 1991, within three
months of his release De Sousa had tried to murder his estranged wife; he
invaded her home, knocked her unconscious and then shot her in the neck,
and had tried to murder two of her women friends by firing shots through
the door of the room in which they were hiding. De Sousa became involved
in the underworld in Eersterust, and came into conflict with organised
gangs; it was alleged he was running two armed gangs himself. In late
1991 he murdered Warren Hartze; a few weeks later he tried to murder four
more people in two separate attacks on their homes.

De Sousa was arrested, and a Pretoria magistrate ruled that he should be
held at a police station until his next appearance. Outraged Eersterust
residents demanded to know why he was not being treated like other
prisoners and remanded at Pretoria Central. He was released on bail in
February 1992 pending a decision by the Attorney General on what charges
should be brought against him. De Sousa and his heavily armed gang began
a reign of terror in Eersterust. From June onwards, the place was
described as being like a "war zone" with constant shootings.

By July 1992, de Sousa had survived no fewer than three attempts on his
life, apparently by members of rival gangs. In one of these cases three
men were arrested and sentenced to various terms of correctional service
or supervision.

In September 1993 De Sousa was charged with one count of murder, seven
counts of attempted murder, four of damage to property, and five or
unlawful possession of a firearm and ammunition. The trial was postponed
until February 1994 and De Sousa was released on R2,000.00 bail. . De
Sousa was eventually sentenced to seventeen years imprisonment. But De
Sousa never served his sentence: he was killed outside prison.


6.3.5.2 Patrick Dlongwana (aka Hlongwane) - a microcosm of the evolution
of state security strategy in the 1980s and 90s


Patrick Dlongwana (police code number 446/8, later altered to OPJ 446/8)
began his career of collaboration with the SAP in 1977. He passed on
information about activists and anti-apartheid groups, and gave testimony
for the state in cases against various activists, resulting in long
prison sentences. In Port Elizabeth he was instructed to set up a
"pseudo-revolutionary" group called "Roots" along with another SB agent
masquerading as a PAC member. Activists at the time remember that
Dlongwana always advocated militant and radical actions in the meetings
of youth structures, and tried to incite violence. The real role of
"Roots" was to disrupt the activities of grassroots anti-apartheid
organisations, sow confusion and mount a disinformation campaign around
certain prominent leaders, to violently disrupt PEBCO meetings and beat
students boycotting classes. Dlongwana's group wore balaclavas to hide
their identities when engaging in this kind of violence.

Dlongwana has stated that after receiving technical training by Lt.
Gideon Nieuwoudt and other officers of the PE Security Branch, he was
sent to Lesotho in late 1982 to photograph houses in which ANC activists
and refugees lived. He completed this mission, returned to South Africa,
and in December participated in the bloody raid on Maseru in which 42
people were killed. During 1984 he was involved in petrol-bombing the
homes of prominent Eastern Cape activists including Sipho Hashi; he
murdered a COSAS member who called him a spy; and then worked with
Thamsanqa Linda, who was running a vigilante group (Linda was known as
"Project Tommy" by the regional AEC office which handled him.) When
deployed on the East Rand, he assisted in disrupting trade union
activities and in the tracking down and murder of an MK cadre. By late
1986 his usefulness to the SB was waning and he was cynically sent to
join the ANC in Lusaka, where he was immediately picked up due to the
notoriety had achieved inside the country. He made a full confession,
available on videotape, which makes it clear that he was not subjected to
duress. He was imprisoned by the ANC until early 1990.

On the return of Dlongwana's group of detainees to South Africa, they
were met at the airport by Inkatha's Bruce Anderson, who told the media
that "a campaign to expose the terror camps of the ANC and to prove the
vulnerability South Africa would have if they elected an ANC government"
would be launched. Dlongwana began to use the name Hlongwane, and
immediately resumed his work for the apartheid regime by fronting for the
Returned Exiles Committee (REC), largely co-ordinated by the SAP. Nico
Basson, a former Military Intelligence communications expert who had been
involved in the covert muti-million anti-SWAPO campaign before the
elections in that country, had earlier made public details on a very
similar campaign waged against SWAPO.

By late 1990 REC had cruelly sent out letters to many families falsely
claiming that their children, relatives or friends had gone missing and
had "probably been murdered by security members of the ANC." Over the
next three years, REC mounted a sustained and vigorous propaganda
campaign aimed at discrediting the ANC through a combination of selective
truth and totally false or grossly exaggerated allegations on conditions
in its former detention centres.

As in the case of the earlier front "Roots", Hlongwane was deployed as a
stratkom tool to not only spread disinformation but also to serve as a
cover for state-directed violence against the ANC which could be
portrayed as the result of internal ANC disputes arising from the exile
past.

In late 1992, on more than one occasion, he threatened to kill ANC
leadership figures whom he falsely accused of being involved in the
torture of former ANC prisoners, and by early 1993 a mysterious
organisation calling itself the "SA Republican Army" (SARA) had appeared,
claiming responsibility for massacres and murders in which it is strongly
suspected that elements within the Internal Stability Division (ISD)
units or other arms of the security forces may have been involved,
including that of Reggie Hadebe. A few months later Hlongwane publicly
stated SARA was the armed wing of RECOC. At no stage was he questioned by
the police on his claims. Not long after this, he was working as a
"junior unpaid information officer" for the National Party's Soweto
branch.

The International Freedom Foundation (IFF), a so-called international
human rights organisation, set up a "commission of inquiry" into the
allegations by certain former detainees. The IFF branch in South Africa
at this time was headed by Russel Crystal, previously involved in
stratkom projects such as the National Students Federation, set up to
counter the influence of NUSAS. He was also a member of De Klerk's
President's Council as late as November 1992. In 1991 the IFF had been
exposed as being among those groups which had received covert funding by
the apartheid regime, yet it continued to mount expensive propaganda
blitzes and organise various costly anti-ANC stratkom operations overseas
and in the country at taxpayers expense, and in total contravention of
the terms of the National Peace Accord. In January 1993 the report of the
IFF- sponsored Douglas Commission was published, purporting to present
evidence establishing that the ANC had "put in place a systematic policy
of depraved brutality and persecution against their own members in exile."

In July 1995 disaffected Security Police operative Paul Erasmus revealed
details of various stratkom operations which had been running under the
De Klerk regime; among the documents he exposed was an "information note"
dated 08/11/90 from Lt-Col. Alf Oosthuizen, chief of intelligence at SAP
HQ in Pretoria, bearing what appears to be the signatures of Adriaan Vlok
and General Johan van Der Merwe, on a planned media conference where two
RECOC members would "reveal the ANC's undemocratic policy, ethnic
divisions in the organisation, and the existence of conditions(sic) in
the Mbarara detention camp in Uganda. (...) RECOC as an organisation acts
wholly independently, although this office co-ordinates its actions (..)
the SAP involvement will in no way be revealed." At the same time it came
to light that the IFF was in fact a front fully funded by the state via
SADF's Military Intelligence since 1986.

There was a bizarre final twist: it emerged in October 1995, with the
publication of the report by the Skweyiya Commission of inquiry into
corruption in the former Bophutatswana, that R150,000 in taxpayer's money
had been channelled to Russel Crystal's' Executive Research Associates
for the publication of the Douglas Commission report via Lucas Mangope's
secret "National Security Fund."

In retrospect, those who covertly ran and financed this anti-ANC
propaganda campaign centred on the allegations of certain former
detainees did achieve one positive result - although not one that they
have welcomed: in its detailed response to the publication of the
Motsuenyane Commission report, the ANC NEC called for the formation of a
Truth Commission:

"In recent years, when there have been investigations into the abuse of
rights that have happened in other national liberation struggles, like
Chile or El Salvador, violations committed by the liberation forces have
comprised only a minute proportion of the number of total transgressions
by illegitimate and authoritarian regimes. There is no reason to believe
that the situation in South Africa is any different. Only a broad
national Truth Commission (...) to investigate the totality of human
rights violations during the years of struggle, not only those committed
by the liberation movement (will establish whether this is in fact true.)
"

In so far as cases of abuse are concerned, the ANC concurs with the
findings of the Motsuenyane Commission that, though there were a number
of such excesses, it was never established that there was any systematic
policy of abuse. Instead, the report illustrates consistent efforts by
the leadership to establish mechanisms of accountability and oversight.
The appointment of these various Commissions illustrates the ANC's candid
and responsible approach to issues of human rights promotion. To quote
the Motsuenyane Commission Report:

"It would be wrong to ignore the historic significance of the
investigation the ANC, through this Commission, has undertaken, a first
in the annals of human rights enforcement. By its commitment to this
inquiry, the ANC seeks to breathe life into the lofty principles
proclaimed in the Freedom Charter - to render fundamental human rights
the Golden Rule, to be applied in good times and bad, peace and war."

To the extent that the Motsuenyane Commission found that some detainees
were maltreated and recommended that the ANC should apologise for these
violations of their human rights, the ANC does so without qualification,
within the context of the standards it has set itself - standards it
wishes our country to attain and maintain, now and in the future


6.4 ANC members who died in exile


Over the years the ANC sought to record all deaths of its members in
exile, irrespective of the cause of death - whether they fell in battle,
died of natural causes, accidents, were murdered by agents of the regime,
or executed after being found guilty of serious crimes. In some cases
cadres have disappeared, and have never been fully accounted for. There
have been cases of cadres who were abducted by agents of the regime, and
if not turned into collaborators through torture, secretly killed. Others
were murdered once they had outlived their usefulness after being
"turned". Many such abductions took place under clandestine conditions as
cadres were either en route to link up with the ANC in exile or on their
way back into South Africa to engage in struggle.

Keeping such records has not been an easy task, given the rigours of
underground existence, raids on homes and offices, and the destruction of
records in the process. Many of the names recorded could be combat or
travelling names, which our cadres assumed in exile. Sometimes they were

known by several such names, depending on the number of countries they
traversed. This was in order to protect the families of cadres from
harassment by the apartheid state, and for the safety of cadres
themselves. Some of our cadres have taken their true identities to their
graves.

It must also be noted that among the many people who left for exile there
were those who never did make contact with the ANC: they either joined
other organisations, acquired refugee status in various host countries,
or disappeared.

After the unbanning of the ANC in 1990 we tried to update our records. A
full-time Bereaved Parents Committee was set up to take on this task by
attempting to find more information on those who had died or disappeared.
In addition this group was tasked with making contact with affected
families nation-wide to inform them of the fate of their loved ones.

However it has not been possible to fill in all the gaps in the records,
nor to contact all those families of those listed in our records of ANC
members who died in this period. Some have not been traced because of
forced removals, dislocation resulting from violence in regions such as
KwaZulu Natal, and other problems. For this we express our regret.

For the information of the Commission and the people of South Africa, our
record of those of our members who died in exile is attached to our
submission.

We intend to continue filling in the gaps in our records; and we appeal
to the Truth Commission and concerned families and individuals to assist
in finishing this task.


6.5 The Mass Democratic Movement and human rights violations in the
context of the mass revolt of the 1980


The emergence in the 1980s of the UDF and the Mass Democratic Movement
(MDM) - a loosely constituted group of organisations established to give
direction to the struggle after the UDF was effectively banned -
introduced a qualitative change in the struggle against apartheid. These
umbrella organisations, drawing together hundred of grassroots
organisations, provided the ANC with important internal, legal allies
which played a major role in the collapse of apartheid rule. As we
submitted earlier, although the UDF/MDM were in broad agreement with the
ANC on all major policy issues, they were separate entities and did not
operate under the control of the ANC.

It is necessary to contextualise violations of human rights which
occurred in the name of these organisations during the mass uprisings of
the 1980s, when spontaneous resistance to apartheid broke out across the
country. Many participants in this struggle did not fall within the
formal structures and organisational discipline of the ANC, but believed
they were acting within the broad parameters of struggle as outlined by
the ANC.

Where activists of the democratic movement were involved in violence it
was frequently in response to the violence of the state or its
representatives. As harassment, detention, shootings and other acts of
repression intensified, ordinary people took steps to defend themselves
against the police, state-run "vigilante" groups, informers and other
criminals.

The context in which violence took place

The generalised violent uprising resulted from the political
intransigence and violence of the apartheid regime, together with
intolerable economic conditions at local level. It was at this stage that
the ANC called on oppressed South Africans to refuse to be governed by
what was essentially an illegitimate and undemocratic regime [See section
5.3 above]. These mass-based struggles soon resulted in a situation in
which the regime could no longer rule black South Africans in the same
old way, but could only relate to them as an army of occupation. These
struggles all contributed to making apartheid unworkable and forcing
those in power to finally come to their senses and agree to a negotiated
solution to the political impasse.

While the UDF and the Mass Democratic Movement campaigned actively
against unjust laws to show up the illegitimacy of the South African
government, and actively opposed apartheid-based structures of governance
such as the councils, these organisations never shifted from their policy
of non-violent forms of struggle.

The UDF was able to provide political leadership which helped contain and
channel popular anger in ways which prevented a racial war.

But the state responded with increasingly repressive measures.
Organisations were prevented from operating openly. Their activities were
disrupted through overt violence or covert "dirty tricks" operations.
Their literature and statements were censored or banned. Their leaders
were banned, detained, forced into exile, or killed - often with extreme
brutality which created intense anger. At times organisations were
incapacitated and left without clear guidance through wholesale detention
of their leadership, and other forms of harassment. The decentralised
nature of the UDF as an umbrella organisation with hundreds of autonomous
affiliates further precluded the possibility of asserting tight,
centralised control over an accountable and disciplined membership. All
these factors made it increasingly difficult to disseminate information
on policy issues, ensure organisational discipline, and a non-violent
approach in a situation of extreme provocation and blanket state
terrorism against black civilians.

As with other forms of struggle, there were instances where individuals
deliberately flouted ANC and UDF/MDM policy, at times out of anger.

By 1987 it had become virtually impossible for the UDF to function
openly. After Murphy Morobe (UDF acting Publicity Secretary) emerged from
a year in hiding to give a press interview, a journalist commented that
Morobe had become "a public relations man who cannot be seen in public,
representing a legal mass organisation that has to operate underground."

Given this situation it was clearly impossible for the UDF/MDM to
actually control all activities carried out in its name by people and
groups who, while supporting the broad aims of these organisations, were
not directly linked to the leadership and discipline of the organisations.

In advance of campaigns such as consumer boycotts and stayaways, the
UDF/MDM issued statements calling for discipline and laying down
guidelines. Yet at times assaults and attacks occurred despite these
directives.

To give another example of difficulties of this nature, people began
setting up Street Committees, People's Courts and similar structures as
an expression of their rejection of the apartheid system. These were
rudimentary forms of popular government, emerging at first as a result of
local initiatives and later with the encouragement of the ANC and MDM.
However, while the motives guiding People's Courts were in essence good -
to counter criminal activities on a community basis - a lack of resources
often meant that no thorough investigations were conducted; as a result,
judgements were often made on the basis of inadequate information.

On a number of occasions both the ANC and UDF/MDM leadership condemned
violations of human rights which occurred as a result of "peoples'
courts", "necklacing", and other unacceptable practices, whilst
recognising the context in which such actions took place. The most
cursory research of the 1980s press and the archives of the UDF will
confirm this fact.

In its attempts to suppress the mass uprising, the state relied on an
extensive network of secret informers, and constantly attempted to turn
activists into a fifth column within the mass democratic movement. In
some cases these attempts were successful; such recruits passed on
information on activists to their handlers in the security forces: this
resulted in lengthy detentions, the smashing of organisations, and many
murders of respected leadership figures and other activists. Other
informers became state witnesses, schooled to give false evidence needed
to convict activists of treason, terrorism and sedition under the
Internal Security Act. Yet others were recruited into death squads, or
deployed as agents provocateurs who incited or perpetrated violence and
then claimed to have been instructed by the UDF and /or the ANC to do so.

In yet other cases, young activists who wanted to serve the cause of
liberation by participating in the armed struggle were lured into fatal
traps by agents of the regime posing as members of MK or the ANC, who
gave them arms and ammunition and wrong instructions on how to use them,
or booby-trapped grenades which killed or grossly maimed the users. These
cynical killings were then attributed to the ANC's armed wing. These and
other heart-rending experiences gave rise to a culture of extreme
intolerance among the youth in particular for informers and those
suspected of being agents provocateurs. In a situation where the forces
of law and order were deployed to attack rather than defend the people,
it is not remotely surprising that activists turned towards meting out
summary justice against suspected agents, and those who openly sided with
the apartheid system, including members of the hated security forces.

The use of extreme methods to neutralise the enemy, which included
deterring and punishing collaborators, was perceived by many as an
entirely justifiable act of self-defence, and the use of harsh methods in
situations of this nature are by no means unique to the struggle for
liberation in South Africa. The tactics of the underground resistance in
Europe in the struggle against Nazism provide but one comparison. In
South Africa, a particularly harsh form of retaliation was the "necklace".

"Necklacing" was never the policy of the ANC or UDF/MDM. The regime took
every opportunity to use "necklacing" as a means to discredit the UDF and
the ANC, at times in the same way that they sought to damage the image of
the ANC by undertaking certain "false flag" operations for which MK was
blamed: evidence is beginning to emerge that this gruesome form of
reprisal may have been initiated by the state, and that on a number of
occasions "necklacings" were the direct result of the work of agents
provocateurs. The revelations of former Vlakplaas commander Dirk Coetzee
and others have shown that the burning of the bodies of murdered
activists was a common practice of this unit long before burning became a
tool of popular retribution.

Recent revelations have implicated self-confessed Vlakplaas operative Joe
Mamasela in the killing of Maki Skosana, the first recorded "necklace"
victim in South Africa. She was involved in a relationship with him, not
knowing that he was a police agent; the deaths and horrific injuries
inflicted on youths by booby-trapped grenades supplied by Mamasela,
resulted in intense anger in the community and it appears that activists
believed that Maki was responsible for introducing the youths to him. An
enraged crowd turned on her when she appeared at the funeral of some of
those youths killed by the booby-trapped grenades.

"Necklacing" also reflected the objective conditions under which the
intensifying mass struggle against apartheid took place: the majority of
people were unarmed and still had to rely on the same weapons they could
find in the 1970s; and as the mass revolt against apartheid spread, it
was impossible for either the ANC or the UDF/ MDM to exercise control
over all aspects of the manner in which people chose to fight apartheid.

The concern expressed by President Nelson Mandela in his statement from
the dock in April 1964 proved prophetic:

"How many Sharpevilles would there be in the history of our country? And
how many more Sharpevilles could the country stand without violence and
terror becoming the order of the day? And what would happen to our people
when that stage was reached?"

Young people in particular lived under conditions guaranteed to breed
violence; as President Tambo put it in an address in 1987 to a conference
focusing on the plight of children under apartheid,

"Children have suffered electric shocks, beatings by fists, sjamboks and
rifle butts, sever deprivation of food and sleep, sexual abuse and
attack, attempted strangulation, solitary confinement and being submerged
in sewerage water or doused with petrol and threatened with"necklacing."
Members of the security forces carry out their duties with indiscriminate
brutality and insensitivity. (...) The effects of arrest, detention and
interrogation are deeply disturbing for any detainee but acutely
traumatic for children. (...) These children are growing up virtually in
a war situation. (...)

"Children are moulded by what society offers and teaches them. They put
back into society what society gives them. The longer this situation is
allowed to continue the more the children are going to think that
violence is necessary for survival and have no regard for life."

This extract from the memoirs of an MK commander, describing a visit to
an MK training camp by Johnny Makathini, at the time the ANC's
representative at the United Nations, provides further insight into the
tensions between ANC policies and mass participation in the struggle by
youths who had grown up under conditions of state terrorism:

"Pango had become our main camp in the Quibaxe area. It was filled with
young recruits from the township uprisings which continued to engulf
South Africa. Many were in their teens. They were enthusiastic and
militant. Johnny was fascinated by their accounts of the street fighting
at home (...) At the same time he was not in agreement with some of the
methods of "rough justice" being used against collaborators. One of these
involved placing a tyre filled with petrol around a victim's neck and
setting it alight. It was called "the necklace."

"While understanding the frustration and anger of the people,
particularly with those seen as traitors and "sell-outs", Tambo and the
ANC leadership unreservedly condemned the practice of "necklacing."
Johnny argued with the youngsters about its cruelty and was surprised to
find how vigorously they defended it.

"Give us guns and we will eliminate the izimpimpi (informers) nice and
cleanly," one young girl responded at our table (...) "Yes, comrade
Makhathini, necklacing is cruel, but it's helped us put the traitors to
flight (...) What the izimpimpi have done to the people is even more
gruesome."

"Johnny relied on the moral argument but failed to convince the young
comrades. (...) I knew that one had to get away from simply the moral
argument which was regarded as academic by those who were daily on the
receiving end of bloodshed and betrayal. "The trouble with necklacing", I
began, "is in its spontaneity and facelessness. Can you reallybe certain
who has shouted out: "That one is an impimpi? It could be an agent
provocateur who levels the accusation. It means that necklacing can
easily become a method used by the security forces to sow confusion. It
is the same with attacks on civilian or "soft" targets. It gives the
enemy the opportunity to discredit us. That's why we stress the need for
disciplined operations, against clearly defined targets." (...) The young
girl remained sceptical....."
Armed and Dangerous, Ronnie Kasrils; Heinemann, 1993 (pp 247-8)

The ANC has never sought to condone all cases of violence of this nature,
nor to disregard the suffering of those targeted for such retribution.
Yet we call on the Commission to consider the cases of those, accused of
criminal activities such as "necklacing", informers, criminals or
"vigilantes" with a full understanding of the highly abnormal
circumstances in which such acts took place, the level of state-sponsered
violence afflicting communities during this period, and of the
consequances flowing from the refusal by agencies of law and order to act
impartially.


===========================================================================



7. Conclusion: Reconciliation, Reparations and the Challenges for the
Future



7.1 The ANC's own conduct


We believe that the masses of the people and the liberation movement
waged a just struggle against apartheid, designated by the UN as a crime
against humanity. This struggle was no different from other
decolonisation struggles in other parts of the world, and developed in
response to the policies and practices of the apartheid regime -
political, social, economic and judicial - which had as their starting
point the perpetuation and defence of a system which was in and of itself
a violation of human rights. This fact has been accepted by all who pay
allegiance to the interim and final constitutions, which represent a
collective attempt to move away from such a system.

However, we do acknowledge that the fact that the ANC waged a just war
against apartheid does not render us or anyone else immune from judgement
on our conduct in the course of the struggle. We have set out the
conditions under which violations of policy occurred. But we emphasise
that none of these violations reflected official policy, or were in way
case sanctioned by the leadership. There are instances where we could
have acted more firmly and speedily to prevent or stop abuses; and for
this the ANC accepts collective responsibility.

From its inception, the ANC sought to pursue a path of struggle that
would persuade the powers-that-be to come to the negotiations table and
accord the majority of the people the rights they deserved. Even at the
height of repression, it was the ANC that initiated the negotiations
process which culminated in the system of non-racial democracy we are
building today.

Over the years, the ANC established rules and organisational procedures
to ensure disciplined conduct among its members. It also set the
foundation for such conduct through systematic education of its members
about the objectives of struggle and the fact that these goals were not
only just and moral, but required all members to conduct themselves as
true custodians of these objectives. This was as much a matter of
survival and winning over the majority of South Africans to the ANC's
side, as it was simple moral logic.

To the extent that there may be questions on matters of detail, or the
need for any elaboration on incidents perceived as gross violations of
human rights referred to in this report, the ANC will make such
additional input as is necessary. Where applicable, individual members
will apply for amnesty.


7.2 An approach to reparations


An important role of the TRC is to ensure that justice prevails to the
maximum extent possible. Justice is not only punishment. Justice is not
revenge or retribution. Whether there is punishment or not, an important
element of justice is restoration, restitution and reparation.

It must be appreciated that the new democratic state does not have the
capacity or resources to fully compensate all those who have suffered.
There are millions of families who have suffered under apartheid in so
many ways who could justifiably say they should be compensated for the
harm which apartheid has caused. There are others whose suffering stems
from other causes who would be able to make similar claims. There needs
to be restoration, restitution and/or reparation within the framework of
such resources or capacity that South Africa can afford. And, in the
final analysis, the creation of a democratic and prosperous society
constitutes the primary form of reconciliation and reparations. The ANC
submits that in making its recommendations, the Commission should take
this fact into account.

Justice demands that the concerns of victims should take centre stage in
the process of reconciliation. In this context all of us need to be
creative in identifying ways in which the TRC, the South African
government, the South African people and various local communities can
together participate in a process of effecting restitution, restoration
and/or reparation. Taking international experience and international
human rights law as well as our situation into account and also taking
into account the constraints imposed upon us, the ANC submits that the
TRC should be able to make recommendations which would include the
following actions:

* monetary awards, either by way of lump sum or monthly pension;
* other forms of material assistance and support;
* psychological support and provision of comfort and solidarity;
* steps to be taken to restore the dignity and honour as well as the
  good names of victims;
* efforts to ensure that the communities become involved in the process
  of reconciliation;
* steps be taken to ensure that South Africa remembers.

This list is not exhaustive and the ANC will seek an opportunity to
address the Commission again in greater detail on the forms which
restitution, restoration and/or reparation could take.

The ANC is also of the view that the TRC should have the power to
intervene on an urgent basis at any time even if such intervention would
be on the basis of interim recommendations for requests or even orders in
circumstances which the Commission may deem appropriate. They would all
be designed to alleviate the plights of victims, help to restore their
dignity and honour, end the humiliation and make them feel that
reconciliation and justice has not been at their expense.


7.3 Lasting reconciliation


In approaching the issue of reconciliation and nation-building, it is
critical to appreciate that human rights violations originated with the
system of colonialism and evolved over centuries. The doctrines of racial
superiority, the pursuit of narrow interests and privileges for the white
minority in general and Afrikaners in particular - all premised on the
exclusion of the majority - "naturally" had to be buttressed by a
repressive regime. Under any and all circumstances, oppression and
exclusion results in the revolt of the slaves at first tentative then
open - and the oppressive state thus resorts to force to maintain unjust
rule.

The system of apartheid and its violent consequences were not an
aberration by a few individuals or a well-intentioned policy that went
wrong. It was systematic; it was deliberate; it was a matter of policy.
Over the years, a system of government was built in which accountability
had been thrown out of the window; where security considerations ruled
the roost; and where the individual rights of all South Africans, and
particularly the black community, were trampled upon.

Therefore, the basic premise in correcting this historical injustice is
for South Africans to pay allegiance to, to consolidate and defend the
democratic constitution and the human rights culture that it espouses. It
is for all citizens to promote and utilise to maximum effect the rights
that we have attained, and ensure that open and accountable government
becomes a matter of course in our body politic. It is for us to promote
equal individual rights without regard to race, colour, religion,
language and other differences; and at the same time ensure that equal
collective rights pertaining to these issues are protected. And it is for
us to work together to build a better life for all.

Combined with the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission -
charged with exposing the evil deeds that have been committed;
investigating the reasons why they happened; and the restoration of the
dignity of the victims and the humanity of the perpetrators - all these
efforts will afford us the confidence and resolve to say: Never Again! We
appreciate the fact that the TRC is pursuing its work without fear or
favour; and we hope that at the end of this process, South Africans will
be the wiser, and better able to march into the future with confidence in
one another and in their capacity to create a prosperous, peaceful and
just society in which any violation of human rights will be fading
memories of a past gone by, never to return.


===========================================================================



Questions which require the attention of the Commission



1 INTRODUCTION



1.1 Arising from this submission there are many questions which need to
be answered within the context of the hearings and investigations of the
TRC. These questions are relevant not only to ensure that the country is
fully appraised of past developments; but also to uncover any of the
networks that may still be operational today and which are therefore a
danger to the fledgeling democracy.

1.2 The questions relate only to some of the developments and serve as
indicators of areas that need particular attention. From this submission,
as well as others, numerous other questions will arise. The critical task
is to determine political responsibility, operational commands and lines
of accountability, as well as the individuals who carried out specific
acts of gross violation of human rights.

1.3 It should be emphasised once more, as underlined in the submission,
that the aim is not retribution, but to bring about justice,
reconciliation and nation-building.

1.4 These question apply equally to the bantustan and other state
structures, to the extent that some of their operations may have been
independently executed.



2 STATE STRUCTURES AND LINES OF COMMAND



2.1 The basic question is: to what extent was each of the acts of gross
violation of human rights sanctioned by the National Party (or bantustan)
political leadership: the cabinet or structures to which executive powers
were delegated! In this regard, the Commission will need to examine
minutes and decisions of the cabinet in the period under review.

2.2 The Commission will also need to obtain documents outlining the
structures, functions and decisions of the State Security Council, its
predecessors and later versions, before and after 1990. It will also
require evidence and input from minister(s)/deputy minister(s) who were
directly responsible for these structures and the key officials in the
hierarchy.

2.3 At the operational level, the following questions arise:


2.3.1 What is the full extent and nature of operations conducted by
hit-squads linked to the CCB, Vlakplaas police unit, the Security Branch,
JMCs, Military Intelligence and Directorate of Covert Collections, with
particular reference to the gross violations of human rights such as
assassinations and mass killings?

2.3.2 Who were the commanders and operatives of these structures, where
are they currently located, and what has happened to the infrastructure
they established or supervised?

2.3.3 What is the full extent and nature of operations conducted under
the auspices of Adult Education Consultants and other such secret
projects and front companies?

2.3.4 Who gave orders for the setting up of, and commanded operations of
the vigilante groups, criminal gangs and hit squads identified in the
submission?

2.3.5 Which of the armed actions were "false flag" operations, who gave
the orders and who executed these operations?

2.3.6 To what extent were state structures involved in initiating or
fanning violent conflict within the black community, including in
particular between ANC and MDM structures or communities on the one hand,
and such organisations as Inkatha and Azapo on the other?




3 AGENTS NETWORK



3.1 Which agents were deployed in the ANC, the MDM, Self-Defence Units
and other community-based structures and in what way were they involved
in the supply of information leading to, or in the actual execution of,
gross violation of human rights?

3.2 Which of the agents who were brought back to the country by the ANC
were reintegrated into the networks of the state and what activities were
and are they involved in?

3.3 Which agents were placed or recruited in the mass media,
collaborating in the cover up or dissemination of state propaganda
relating to these gross violations of human rights, and are any of them
still operational today? In particular, what network existed linking
stratkom structures and the state broadcaster, the SABC, and who among
them are still operational today?

3.4 Which of the extreme "right-wing" groups, such as Orde Boerevolk were
linked to state structures and which of their operations were at the
instigation of the state or its agents?



4 MURDERS AND ASSASSINATIONS



4.1 Who authorised and who executed each of the murders of anti-apartheid
activists in detention over the period under review?

4.2 Who authorised, who commanded and who carried out the murders in
demonstrations, strikes or the random killings in the townships and
villages?

4.3 Who was in charge of the project to manufacture and allocate the
poison used in the cases identified in the submission, including Thami
Zulu, Francis Meli and Solly Smith; and who carried out these operations
as well as others that may not yet have been exposed?

4.4 Who authorised, commanded and carried out the assassination of
leaders and cadres of the ANC (names are attached to this report) as well
as members of other anti-apartheid organisations both within and outside
the country?

4.5 The previous National Party government and its substructures should
avail information on the fate of cadres of the ANC and other
anti-apartheid structures who were captured and have "disappeared" (Names
of ANC cadres attached to this report). What was their fate and who
ordered and carried out the operations?

4.6 Which of the judicial officers and medical personnel co-operated in
these gross violations directly or by means of cover-ups?



5 EXTERNAL DESTABILISATION AND AGGRESSION



5.1 Who ordered and who executed raids on ANC houses and other targets
outside South Africa, including the Matola raid of 1981, the Maseru
massacre of 1982, the Gaberone and Lesotho raids in 1985, the raid on
Lusaka in 1987 and so on?

5.2 Who was responsible for the political approval, planning and
execution of the destabilisation campaign in Angola, Mozambique, Lesotho,
Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Botswana and other neighbouring countries?
In addition:


5.2.1 Who authorised and commanded the operations to assist Unita and
Renamo; what forms did these actions take; and when were they terminated?

5.2.2 What are the true facts behind the crash of the plane which was
carrying President Samora Machel and other Mozambican officials, and who
was responsible for this action?

5.2.3 Who authorised and commanded the activities of Koevoet, 5
Reconnaissance Regiment, 32 Battalion and other such units; and what have
been their activities since their re-deployment within the country?

5.3 Did the apartheid regime use chemical weapons in its operations in
Angola, Mozambique and other neighbouring countries: who authorised this
and who carried out the operations?




===========================================================================

For Appendix, go back to the contents page




Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Code

[This document was released at the ANC National Consultative Conference
at Kabwe in June 1985. It was part of a larger document titled " Report
of Commission on National Structures, Constitutional Guidelines and Codes
of Conduct"]

Preamble


Recognising that our army, Umkhonto we Sizwe, must define its aims and
objects in clear and precise terms, and that the rights and duties of
each member should be likewise defined without ambiguity, the
Politico-Military Council, acting on behalf of the African National
Congress of South Africa, has adopted and hereby decrees this code for
the guidance of members in cell positions.


1. Umkhonto we Sizwe - a People's Army


The ANC and its allies created Umkhonto as a new and indispensable weapon
in the struggle for people's power. Unlike the armed forces of the racist
regime of South Africa, which we have vowed to crush and annihilate, and
unlike all other armies of imperialism, Umkhonto we Sizwe is a People's
Army organised and dedicated to waging a people's war for the liberation
of our country.

Umkhonto is an army of volunteers. It consists of volunteers drawn from
the revolutionary sections of our people. By joining Umkhonto, combatants
commit themselves to the solemn and noble duty of serving our suffering
and dispossessed people in the struggle that will continue for each and
all of us until victory or death.

In the words of our founding Manifesto, published on the historic day of
16th December 1961: 'Umkhonto we Sizwe will be at the front line of the
people's defence. It will be the fighting arm of the people against the
racist government and its policies of racial oppression. It will be the
striking force of the people for liberty, for rights and for their final
liberation.'

The founding Manifesto of Umkhonto we Sizwe is our definitive declaration
of intent, and an essential guide to the reasons for the creation and
aims of this, the People's Army. We append the Manifesto to this Code, to
be studied and understood by every Umkhonto combatant. It was no
coincidence that MK's first operations were launched on December 16,
Dingane's Day. Umkhonto will carry on the warrior traditions of our
people under the conditions of modern guerrilla warfare.

Those who join Umkhonto we Sizwe, the People's Army, perform a sacred
duty to our people, our nation and the South African Revolution. When we
have liberated our country, Umkhonto will constitute the basis of the
defence forces of our country and the Revolution, and will serve as an
instrument of social progress.

An Umkhonto combatant has the opportunity to serve in the forefront of
the liberation struggle, to meet the enemy and engage him with modern
weapons, to become a steeled revolutionary who at all times is determined
to serve and protect the people and his fellow comrades-in-arms.

We look back with great pride to the period of militant non-violent
struggle waged by the ANC. During this period our people learnt through
their own experience that they could not satisfy their aspirations except
by means of armed struggle arising out of our mass political activity and
culminating in a revolutionary seizure of power.

When time was ripe for violent forms of struggle, our people understood
and supported the decision to take up arms. They clearly understood as
long ago as December 1961, that our Movement had exhausted all peaceful
avenues, and that the oppressor had imposed on us a war situation. The
alternative to armed struggle was submission. As the Umkhonto Manifesto
declared: 'The People's patience is not endless. The time comes in the
life of any nation when there remains only two choices - submit or fight.
That time has now come in South Africa. We shall not submit and we have
no choice but to hit back by all means within our power in defence of our
people, our future and our freedom.'


2. Political and Military Struggle


Umkhonto we Sizwe is the fighting arm of the ANC and its allies. Our
armed struggle is a continuation of our political struggle by means that
include armed force. The political leadership has primacy over the
military. Our military line derives from our political line. Every
commander, commissar, instructor and combatant must therefore be clearly
acquainted with the policy with regard to all combat tasks and missions.
All of us must know clearly who the enemy is , and for what we are
fighting. Thus MK cadres are not only military units, they are also
organisers of our people. That is the major distinction between our
people's revolutionary army and the army and wholly militarised
authoritarian armed forces of the racists, imperialists and reactionary
regimes. Umkhonto cadres, with arms in hand, are political activists and
leaders, as well as warriors. This combination of political and military
functions is characteristic of all popular, revolutionary armies
especially in the phase of guerrilla warfare.


3. People's War


Umkhonto is a people's army fighting a people's war. We fight to liberate
our oppressed and exploited people. We fight for their interests.
Umkhonto has no mercenaries, no paid soldiers or conscripted troops. It
consists of the sons and daughters of the most oppressed, the most
exploited sections of our people. For these reasons we claim with pride
and truth: Umkhonto is the Spear of the Nation.

We fight a people's war, not by armed struggle alone, but first and above
all by political education, leadership and mobilisation. It is a people's
war because the struggle is to win the active support and participation
of all who resist oppression, discrimination, poverty and injustice.

The people support their army by providing it with recruits - their sons
and daughters - food, shelter, and information about the enemy. The
people open the way for our guerrillas and make the enemy's path hard.
Everyone can become a freedom fighter. The struggle has many fronts and
is not confined to trained soldiers alone.

The ANC mobilises the people in support of the revolution through
skillful combination of all forms of struggle: violent and non-violent,
legal and illegal, strikes and demonstrations, boycotts and
non-collaboration, propaganda, education and sabotage. A people's war is
fought by the people with arms and all other forms and methods of
struggle. Without the organised support of the people, armed struggle is
in danger of being isolated and strangled. The enemy attempts to isolated
us by launching campaigns to win the 'hearts and minds' of the people -
of our people, the oppressed and suffering workers and peasants. To
defeat the enemy, we must involve the entire people in the National
Democratic Revolution.

The enemy controls the state, its armed forces, police and courts. But he
does not command the hearts and minds of the people. They are with us in
a just war for national liberation. Their support is our chief weapon.
What gives the guerrilla his advantage is his political superiority and
people's support. As pointed out in Operation Mayibuye (1963) the most
important guarantee of victory is 'the support of the people who in
certain situations are better protection than mountains and forests'.


4. Our People's Army


1. Umkhonto we Sizwe fights to liberate our people from racial
   discrimination, national oppression and exploitation.
2. The common enemy is the racist minority which identifies with and
   gives aid to the National Party regime, the creator and driving force
   of apartheid.
3. Our programme is the Freedom Charter; it defines the goals of all
   democrats regardless of colour, race or creed.
4. The interests of the people and the demands of the revolution are
   inseparable and the main concern of the people's army.
5. Our MK Manifesto declares that the army includes in its ranks South
   Africans of all races. But the overwhelming majority are members of
   the most oppressed and exploited people. By this dedication and
   commitment and training, they represent the vanguard of our people. In
   Umkhonto language, the army is the Spear of the Nation.


5. Umkhonto insists on a high standard of selfless devotion to the
revolution on the part of all its members.


They are required at all times to:

1. behave correctly to the people;
2. respect their persons and property;
3. refrain from molesting or interfering with their legitimate
   activities;
4. assist them to solve their problems and where possible give
   material aid in their labour; and
5. demonstrate high moral qualities in word and deed.


6. Revolutionary Discipline and Consciousness


To defeat the enemy in combat, our soldiers must be disciplined, trained
to obey commands promptly, and ready to spring into battle immediately
when ordered. Vigilance, alertness and readiness to engage the enemy at a
moment's notice are qualities that can develop only out of discipline,
proper training and political consciousness.

Bourgeois and reactionary armies like the army forces of the racists,
instil a mechanical and robot-like obedience in their units. The people's
army has a different conception of discipline and loyalty. Umkhonto
soldiers are volunteers, willing and trained to carry out orders in the
knowledge that instant obedience is the only way to safeguard life, both
of the individual and his comrades-in-arms, and to protect the people he
serves.

Umkhonto soldiers pledge themselves to safeguard the revolution at all
times regardless of personal hardships, suffering and danger. A soldier
who breaks discipline, disobeys commands or by improper conduct betrays
the high moral standards of our army will be punished. Such punishment is
necessary to maintain the qualities expected of a people's army. Every
attempt is made to correct bad behaviour and rehabilitate members who
violate the army's code. But punishment is severe in cases of serious
crimes, treachery and criminal neglect endangering the safety of others
and the security of the army.

Our procedure and rules are well defined, precise and to the point.
Military orders are issued with a definite purpose and must be obeyed. It
is the duty and responsibility of every soldier to know and understand
the army's code of conduct, to recognise his military commanders, to be
clear about his own duties, and to carry out orders immediately and
without question. Orders must be obeyed cheerfully, promptly and exactly.
A soldier who does not understand an order has a right to have it
explained. He must know when to raise problems, to whom he must report,
and how to obtain clarification. He must not, in any circumstances,
refuse to obey a command or argue over the execution of an order.

Outright disobedience and failure to obey an order promptly may have
serious consequences. A soldier who thinks that he has been given a wrong
order must obey it first and if need be complain afterwards to his
commander. Our commanding officers, commissars, instructors and others
who are entrusted with responsibility to lead must be above reproach.
They are to be a shining example of modesty, sound moral behaviour,
correct attitudes towards all members, respectful and helpful to every
member of the army, regardless of his position. Commanders and Political
Commissars occupy a central role in Umkhonto. Without them disorder can
result. They are the principal target of the enemy and must be given
maximum protection. Umkhonto is engaged in guerrilla warfare, against a
powerful and remorseless enemy which resorts to torture, banditry and
terrorism.

During the stage of guerrilla warfare, great initiative and
resourcefulness are required of every combatant. Under such conditions,
formalities such as the courtesy of saluting commanders are reduced to a
minimum, while discipline and vigilance are maintained at the highest
levels.

In our external training bases, however, we have conditions and
facilities similar to those of a regular army. Here we insist on full
military procedures, including the practice of saluting commanding
personnel; higher ranks; parades; roll calls; and fall-ins. These are
necessary for the orderly camp life and discipline and co-operation among
guerrillas in combat zones.

The inner forms of discipline, arising from political maturity and
consciousness of our struggle, are far more important and enduring than a
discipline enforced from above. But a proud bearing, alertness and quick
response to commands, a smart uniform, and respect of leadership,
commanders and commissars are the hallmarks of a good soldier who is
proud of his platoon, detachment and army.

With the triumph of our revolution, Umkhonto will be the official army of
our country, the true shield of our nation, defending the people against
external aggression and internal counter-revolution. To prepare ourselves
for these noble tasks, we must live up to the army's code of conduct in
all respects and at all times during the present phase of our struggle.


General Regulations


1. All army units shall preserve and safeguard political and military and
organisational information relating to the army's security and well-being.

The wilful or negligent disclosure of classified information to
unauthorised persons, and the unauthorised acquisition and/or retention
of secrets and classified documents shall be an offence.

2. All combatants must defend the ANC and be loyal to it, the army and
the revolution.

The following acts or omissions shall be an offence:

1. Disloyalty or deception designed or likely to give assistance to
   the enemy.
2. Rebellion or revolt against the army command or part of it or
   attempts to commit such an act of rebellion or revolt.
3. Conduct which causes despondence, spreads a spirit of defeatism, or
   undermines morale in any member or section of the army.
4. Cowardly conduct in the face of the enemy.
5. Wilful disobedience or refusal of orders properly given by a
   commander.
6. Desertion from the army.

3. All combatants shall act in such a manner that the people will put
their trust in the army, recognise it as their protector, and accept the
liberation movement as their legitimate and authentic representative.

The following acts or omissions shall be an offence:

1. Conduct that weakens the people's trust, confidence and faith in
   the ANC and Umkhonto.
2. Theft from a comrade or the people, looting of property, or other
   forcible seizure of goods.
3. Abuse of authority and/or power.
4. Cruelty inflicted on a member of the army or public.
5. Assaults, rape, disorderly conduct, the use of insulting and/or
   obscene language, bullying and intimidation, whether against a comrade
   or member of the public.
6. Shameful conduct likely to disgrace the ANC, army or the offender,
   or bring them into disrepute, or provoke indignation and contempt
   against them, such as violating the rights and dignity of the opposite
   sex, whether in operational or base areas.
7. Unjustifiable homicide.
8. Ill-treatment of prisoners of war or persons in custody.

4. All combatants shall protect the leadership and property of the ANC
and Umkhonto

The following acts or omissions shall be an offence:

1. Failure to protect commanders and commissars against assault or
   attacks.
2. Wilful negligent destruction, neglect or misuse of the property
   and/or funds of the ANC and army.
3. Failure to submit and hand over to the commanding authority
   property seized or acquired during military operations.
4. Negligence in handling, using or storing and loss of weapons.

5. All combatants are required to have the permission of a competent
authority to travel, move from one place to another or leave a camp, base
or residence to which they are assigned.

The following acts or omissions shall be an offence:

1. Absence without permission.
2. Escaping or attempting to escape from the custody of a competent
   authority.

6. All combatants and members of the ANC and Umkhonto shall observe high
moral standards and show an adequate sense of responsibility.

The following acts or omissions shall be an offence:

1. Smoking dagga or using other harmful drugs or being in unauthorised
   possession of the same.
2. Neglect of duty.
3. Drunkenness on duty and/or in public.

7. All members of the ANC and combatants are required to promote and
preserve the unity of the ANC, the army, the liberation movement and the
people.

Any act or speech that provokes tribal or regional animosities or spreads
disunity by means of factionalism and/or racism shall be an offence.

8. Punishment

All members of the ANC and combatants are required to respect the terms
of the Geneva Convention on the Treatment of Prisoners of War in line
with the formal acceptance by the ANC of these terms in 1981. Any
violation of these terms shall be an offence. Subject to these proposals,
the Commission recommended that:

1. The codes be accepted in their entirety.
2. They come into force immediately.
3. Their operation be reviewed after two years' experience.
4. The Justice Officer be appointed as soon as possible and that
   amongst his first tasks be an investigation, in the light of the
   principles of the codes, of all cases of persons still serving
   sentences in terms of earlier proceedings, and of all cases awaiting
   trial.
5. The military code be strengthened by the inclusion of a section
   dealing with competence, hearings and appeals; the necessary drafting
   to be done by responsible officials in MK.

All members of the ANC and Umkhonto shall tactfully observe the general
regulations and shall be liable to the penalties prescribed for offences
under the regulations. The purpose of punishment is to deter members from
committing an offence, assist offenders to rehabilitate and protect the
ANC, Umkhonto, liberation and the revolution. In imposing punishment, the
competent authorities shall be guided by high political principles to the
exclusion of personal animosity or any trace of vendetta. Punishments
shall be administered humanely and without undue harshness or cruelty.

The following punishments may be ordered for offences under the
regulations according to the gravity of the offence and the circumstances
under which it was committed:

1. Reprimand or rebuke administered in private or public.
2. Suspension from duty for a specified period.
3. Fatigue and drills.
4. Restriction with hard labour for a specified period determined by
   tribunal.
5. Demotion from a position of responsibility.
6. Restriction in a rehabilitation centre.
7. Dishonourable discharge.
8. Solitary confinement for a period determined by tribunal.
9. The maximum penalty.
10. Any other penalty not included herein but appearing in the
    schedule of penalties for grave or serious crimes and violations.


Rules and Regulations Covering the Handling of Weapons and Explosives of
our Movement


Introduction

Amongst the most sacred duties of a soldier in MK is to protect and
preserve the weaponry and other war material of our army - in certain
circumstances even with life. The loss of a weapon would be regarded in
the same light as the loss of a limb and has serious consequences for the
body of our army.

Our weaponry and other war materials are there to be used against our
enemy and must, at all times, be maintained in a proper state of combat
readiness and must only be used to further our revolution. This is the
duty of every organ and individual soldier entrusted with the task of
handling such material.

In the interests of our revolution the following rules and regulations
will be strictly enforced:

1. The Politico-Military Council under the direction of the NEC shall
   be the organ which decides on the distribution and use of all weapons
   and explosives in any given area.
2. All members of the ANC who possess a personal weapon or weapons are
   under obligation to declare it or them to the authorised organs or
   persons in the Movement for registration and for determining whether
   the comrade should be authorised to keep the weapon or surrender it.
3. All weapons not supplied by authorised persons in the hands of
   individuals or groups must be reported and declared immediately.
   Failing to fulfil this requirement constitutes a serious offence
   against the Movement and carries with it a heavy punishment.
4. Unauthorised possession and use of weapons is strictly prohibited.
5. It is strictly forbidden to point a weapon, loaded or otherwise, at
   any person other than our enemy.
6. It is a serious offence to abandon without proper cause, lose,
   misuse, neglect or damage weapons, ammunition and explosives.
7. Unauthorised exchange, barter or transfer of a weapon(s) is
   strictly forbidden.
8. All weapons, ammunition and explosives must be handled by
   authorised persons and must be totally concealed in public except
   during combat marches in our training camps and schools and where
   permission is granted to have weapons for the defence of ANC personnel
   and property.
9. All records, inventories of all war materials have to be kept by
   Ordnance, Security and by any organ entrusted with such material.
10. The use of war materials for emergency purposes has to be
    reported to the appropriate authority.
11. The security and care or all weapons shall be the responsibility
    of those entrusted with them.
12. All transfer and movement of war materials form one area to the
    other shall be entrusted to the Ordnance Department.
13. Safety measures must be observed when handling weapons and
    explosives.
14. Authorised persons are not allowed to handle weapons under the
    influence of liquor.



===========================================================================




List of ANC Members who Died in Exile



March 1960 - December 1993



===========================================================================





DIED AT THE HANDS OF THE ENEMY


ZIMBABWE - WANKIE 1967
1st Battle: 13/8/67 RECONNAISSANCE
1 State  
2 February, Basil (Paul Peterson)  
3 Makgotsi, Jones  
4 Mampuru, Christopher  
5 Maseko, Don Donga Died later of kidney problems 
6 Masemeni, James  
7 Mhlongo, John Injured left with Zapu died later 
8 Modumo, Ernest (Steven Maelebyane)  
9 Motsepe, Andries  
10 Sharp, Alfred  
11 Sibanyoni, Delmas  
2nd Battle 21/8/67
12 Baloi, Robert  
13 Masipa, Barry  
14 Moloi, Sparks  
15 Setsoba, Charles (Jack Simelane)  
3rd Battle 22/8/67
16 Donda (from Natal)  
17 Mahamba, Sparks  
18 Mhambi, Charles (Rhodes Msuntu Ngamela)  
19 Nduna, Eric  
WANKIE: 1967 (UNKNOWN BATTLE)
20 Donga  
21 Mbali, Jackson  
22 Ndlovu, Joseph Spoe *  
23 Nduku, Knox  
24 Nondulo, Ernest  
25 Theo, Mkhaliphi  
SIPOLILO 1967-1968
1 Bandon, Gordan 09/04/68 
2 Basset, Basel (Jampie Brooklane) 18/03/68 
3 Biyela, Philimon 10/04/68 
4 Goniwe, Jacques 18/03/68 
5 Hlatswayo, Hlatswayo 00/00/00 
6 Hlekani, Gandi 26/03/68 
7 Joseph, Zami 00/00/00 
8 Maloma, Tony 00/05/68 
9 Mayona, Sydwell 00/00/00 
10 Melani, Lenon 00/05/68 
11 Mkhaba, William 00/11/68 
12 Mkhonza, Zelani 22/03/68 
13 Mgwacela, Badman 00/00/00 
14 Molefe, David (Phoko) 21/03/68 
15 Mosedi, Patrick (Molowa) 18/03/68 
16 Mthusi, George (Khami Prison) 00/00/00 
17 Mzati, Kenneth 20/03/68 
18 Ndlovu, Joseph Spoe * 00/00/00 
19 Ngalo, Ben 26/03/68 
20 Poo, Mike (Festus Nturu Boikhutso) 21/03/68 
21 Sharp, Alfred 00/00/00 
22 Tsele, Benson 21/03/68 
23 Tsotetsi, Stanley 18/03/68 

COMRADES KILLED IN RHODESIA IN 1979
1 Benjamin (doctor)  
2 Chauke, Elijah  
3 Dinoyane, David (Tony)  
4 Kgejane, Andries M  
5 Madi, Andrew MD  
6 Maseku, Abraham  
7 Maseku, Sophia Theko  
8 Mmultane, Matthew B  
9 Mmutlane, Matthew M  
10 Mogojane, Albert  
11 Ndwashlana, Duduzile  
12 Sithole, Arthur  
13 Tengani, Johannes  
14 Zondo, Charlton  

ZIMBABWE POST-INDEPENDENCE KILLINGS
15 Chiliza, Tsitzi Bomb in TV 11/05/87
16 Gqabi, Joe Nzinga Assassinated 31/07/81

ANGOLA - LETTER BOMBED/SADF RAID
1 Patrick, Timothy (CN)  00/00/79
2 Schoon, Katryn Joyce Letter bomb 23/06/84
3 Schoon, Jeanette Eva Letter bomb 23/06/84

BOTSWANA - ASSASSINATIONS/BOMBS/RAIDS
1 Alpheus, Dlamini  11/11/88
2 Geer, Ahmed Mohamed SADF Raid 14/06/85
3 Hamlyn, Michael Frank SADF Raid 14/06/85
4 Kesupile, Gladys Kelape SADF Raid 14/06/85
5 Kobole, Euginia Kakale SADF Raid 14/06/85
6 Machobane, Themba Duke SADF Raid 14/06/85
7 Malaza, Joseph SADF Raid 14/06/85
8 Mapua, Ronald M. *  00/00/00
9 Mapua, Ronald T.M. *  00/00/88
10 Mofaka, Peter Kamohelo SADF Raid 14/06/85
11 Mokoena, Charles Mokoena  00/00/88
12 Molokwane, Jacob Shot 13/01/88
13 Mosimane, Butiki A.  01/07/88
14 Mnyele, Harry Thamsanga SADF Raid 14/06/85
15 Mtsweni, Dick Nkukwana SADF Raid 14/06/85
16 Nkadimeng, Vernon Car bomb 21/05/85
17 Phahle, Cecil George SADF Raid 14/06/85
18 Phahle, Lindi SADF Raid 14/06/85
19 Polokela, Matsela  16/06/86
20 Tiro, Abraham Parcel bomb 00/00/74
21 Tuku, Thembisile T.  11/11/86
22 Vundla, Patrick S.  28/03/88
23 Zondi, Basil Amos  14/06/8

MOZAMBIQUE - ASSASSINATIONS/BOMBS/RAIDS
1 Billy, (MK name)  00/00/00
2 Bookolane, Thabang SADF Raid 30/01/81
3 Daka, Mandla Henson SADF Raid 30/01/81
4 Daniel, Molokisi SADF Raid 30/01/81
5 Dimba, Themba Francis SADF Raid 30/01/81
6 First, Ruth Parcel bomb 17/08/82
7 Guma, Mduduzi SADF Raid 30/01/81
8 Khanyile, William SADF Raid 30/01/81
9 Khumalo, Vikeliswe Colin SADF Raid 30/01/81
10 Levinson, Mankankaza SADF Raid 30/01/81
11 Magubane, Bheki SADF Raid 30/01/81
12 Mahlakola, Philemon A.  11/11/79
13 Mahutso, Solomon Albert SADF Raid 30/01/81
14 Mhlongo, Reginald Enock  11/07/89
15 Mokgabundi, Motso Mokgabudi SADF Raid 30/01/81
16 Ngcobo, Steven SADF Raid 30/01/81
17 Ngesi, Themba Poisoned 21/09/86
18 Ngwema, Vusumuzi Justice SADF Raid 30/01/81
19 Phinda, Samuel Poisoned 00/00/00
20 Rabilall, Krishna SADF Raid 30/01/81
21 Radebe, Lancelot Manafuthi SADF Raid 30/01/81
22 Skweyiya, Sinzingo W.  30/01/81
23 Thabang  00/00/00

LESOTHO - RAIDS/ASSASSINATIONS
1 Nombewe SADF Raid 09/12/82
2 Biza, Toto SADF Raid 09/12/82
3 Baloyi, Jacob  00/00/00
4 Bantwini, Dr N. SADF Raid 09/12/82
5 Dantile, Lulamile H  20/12/85
6 Daries, Glen  20/12/85
7 Dyani, Lizethile SADF Raid 09/12/82
8 Fazzie, Mzwandile SADF Raid 09/12/82
9 Gova, Zwelindaba SADF Raid 09/12/82
10 Kana, Samson N. SADF Raid 09/12/82
11 Khuzwayo, Sibusiso SADF Raid 09/12/82
12 Leshoro, Robert  00/00/00
13 Magaga, Bongani  00/00/00
14 Magekaza, Mazizi Killed in hospital bed 00/00/88
15 Maqhekeza, Ngubekhaya SADF Raid 09/12/82
16 Marayi, Lepota SADF Raid 09/12/82
17 Marwanqana, Alfred F. SADF Raid 09/12/82
18 Marwanqana, Mzukisi SADF Raid 09/12/82
19 Marwanqana, Thandi SADF Raid 09/12/82
20 Mathe, Vivian *  20/12/85
21 Mathee, V. Stanley *  20/12/85
22 Mayoli, Joseph M. SADF Raid 09/12/82
23 Mayoli, Joseph Monwabisi  27/04/90
24 Mazibuko, Themba SADF Raid 09/12/82
25 Mbali, Mxolisi  00/00/81
26 Mbuso, Bongani SADF Raid 09/12/82
27 Mchunu, Sipho SADF Raid 09/12/82
28 Mdlankomo, Liqwa SADF Raid 09/12/82
29 Medupi, Staloko  00/00/00
30 Meyer, Leon  20/12/85
31 Mlenze, Michael SADF Raid 09/12/82
32 Mini, Nomkhosi  20/12/85
33 Modimeng, Joyce  20/12/85
34 Modisane, Jerry  00/00/83
35 Mophuthing, Joseph  19/08/85
36 Mpongoshe, Phakamile SADF Raid 09/12/82
37 Mthandela, Dumisani SADF Raid 09/12/82
38 Mvala, Mark SADF Raid 09/12/82
39 Ngxito, Cecil P SADF Raid 09/12/82
40 Notana, Sipho SADF Raid 09/12/82
41 Nqini, Zola (Chief Rep) SADF Raid 09/12/82
42 Ntoyi, Faku C. SADF Raid 09/12/82
43 Nyukile, Trom (Gazi) Jackson Tayo SADF Raid 09/12/82
44 Quin, Jackie  20/12/85
45 Radebe, Thandwefika  00/00/00
46 Seroto, Matikwane SADF Raid 09/12/82
47 Vasi, Mzwanele SADF Raid 09/12/82
48 Ziba, Vuyani SADF Raid 09/12/82

ZAMBIA - ASSASSINATIONS/BOMBS
1 Dube, John Parcel bomb 00/00/74
2 Lewatle, Pope Drowning 00/00/88
3 Mkhonzi, Zakithi Car bomb 28/11/88
4 Mvemve, Boy Mvemve Parcel bomb 12/02/74
5 Naidoo, Sahdhan Assassinated 15/04/89
6 Ngubane, Jones Shot 10/07/86
7 Thole, Mthunzi Assassinated 15/04/89

NAMIBIA - Caprivi, Katimo Molilo 1970s
1 Madiba  
2 Makalipha, Theo  
3 Mashego, Flag  

SWAZILAND - ASSASSINATIONS/RAIDS/BOMBS/POISON
1 Majola Ambush 00/00/79
2 Rocky *  00/00/84
3 Tallman  00/00/00
4 Tladi Disappeared 00/00/00
5 Zandi Kidnapped/shot 00/00/89
6 Abithur, Albie M.  00/00/87
7 Cothoza, June Rose Nontsikelelo  00/06/88
8 Dikeledi, Paul Assassination 00/07/87
9 Dladla, Mzala  00/00/87
10 Dlodlo, Theophilus  00/00/00
11 Hlongwane, Nelson  00/00/86
12 Khutho, Ngwane M.E Shot 11/06/86
13 Luxomo, Mthuinzi W. Shootout 00/00/84
14 MacFadden, Keith Raid 00/00/83
15 Magagula, Mgqibelo Frans  22/12/89
16 Majola, Busi  11/06/96
17 Majola, John Abducted/killed 00/00/78
18 Makau, Patrick M.  00/00/82
19 Make, Cassius Assassination 00/07/87
20 Maphumula, Shadrack Assassination 16/12/86
21 Mashobane, Derrick  00/00/89
22 Masilela, Grace  00/00/80
23 Masina, Leslie  00/00/00
24 Masupha, Rocky * Disappeared 00/00/84
25 Matlala, George Shootout 00/00/84
26 Mazenzo, Sipho  00/00/87
27 Mazibuko, Mandla  00/00/78
28 Mkondo, Polly  00/00/00
29 Mohale, Thabo  00/00/89
30 Molefe, Popo D. Shootout 00/00/84
31 Moropa, Sydney  00/00/84
32 Motau, Peter Sello  09/07/87
33 Msibi, Mandla Poison 00/00/82
34 Mthembu, Charity (Lindiwe Nyembezi)  00/06/88
35 Mthembu, Joseph Boxer  00/06/88
36 Mvembe, Jimmy (Janus Khoza)  00/00/00
37 Naidoo, Lennie  00/06/88
38 Nangu, Billy Ambush 00/00/81
39 Ndabe, Solly K.  02/066/85
40 Ndlovu, George Ambush 00/00/82
41 Ndlovu, Thrush Shootout 00/00/82
42 Ngcobo, Solly Shot 00/00/84
43 Ngema, Sipho Shot 13/01/88
44 Nkutha, Khehla Ambush 00/00/77
45 Nqcobo  00/00/84
46 Nxumalo, Sifiso Howard  00/06/88
47 Nyanda, Zwelakhe Raid 00/00/83
48 Nyoka, Makhosi  00/06/88
49 Nyoni, Willie Abducted/killed 00/00/78
50 Nzima, Jabu Nyawose Car bomb 04/06/82
51 Nzima, Patrick Boy Car bomb 04/06/82
52 Pharasi, Israel  00/06/88
53 Ramusi, Selaelo Ill in prison 11/11/79
54 Shabangu, Portia  00/00/89
55 Sibande, Gert Richard Ill 21/01/87
56 Sibisi, Jabulani Joseph (Jojo)  00/06/88
57 Sishi, Jabulani  00/00/00
58 Sithole, Ambrose  00/00/00
59 Thabane, Jacob  09/07/87
60 Thabethe, Charles Shot 11/06/86
61 Thenjekwayo, Nkosinathi  00/06/88
62 Mildred, Msomi  00/00/87

FRANCE
1 September, Dulcie Assassinated 28/03/88

ANGOLA - DEATHS DUE TO UNITA AMBUSHES
1 Smangaliso 13/10/88 
2 Bhentele, Nimrod 20/05/88 
3 Bonya, Lulamile 06/10/88 
4 Deyi, Gladman 20/05/88 
5 Dlamini, Johannes 13/10/88 
6 Dlamini, Patrick 03/03/88 
7 Dludla, Reginald 26/12/83 
8 Dlwathi, Siphiwe 13/10/88 
9 Fihla, Thamsanqa 05/02/88 
10 Flatela, Kgotso 03/03/88 
11 Frans, Mawethu D. 10/06/88 
12 Gabela, D.Boy 03/03/88 
13 Ganyqaza, Gerald 03/03/88 
14 Gxekani, Mzwandile 13/10/88 
15 Hlatshwayo, Machocho 13/10/88 
16 Hlobo, Mziwoxolo 06/10/88 
17 Jack, Samukele 13/10/88 
18 Kelly, Mzolisi 03/03/88 
19 Khosi, David 03/03/88 
20 Khumalo, Florence 03/03/88 
21 Korjas, Peter 21/12/88 
22 Kuboni, Mvuleni J. 13/10/88 
23 Kutwana, Abraham 11/08/87 
24 Lebelwane, Barney 04/10/84 
25 Mabaso, Alan K. 26/12/83 
26 Madontsela, Skhumbuzo 18/11/87 
27 Mahlangu, Solomon 18/11/87 
28 Majane, Andrew 10/06/88 
29 Mahlobo, Mandla 18/04/86 
30 Makae, Samuel 13/10/88 
31 Makhasane, Thabo 13/10/88 
32 Maseko, Scelo 13/10/88 
33 Maserole, Peter 11/08/87 
34 Mashika, King George 03/03/88 
35 Masinga, Vusumuzi 24/05/87 
36 Matake, Samuel 06/10/88 
37 Matomela, Patrick 15/05/88 
38 Matya, Siphiwe 05/11/87 
39 Mbongwe, Emily 09/01/83 
40 Mdingi, Mnceisi 26/06/87 
41 Mike, Colenso 00/11/88 
42 Mjovane, Malixole 06/04/88 
43 Mlandu, Mandla 13/10/88 
44 Mncedisi, Mdunga 00/12/87 
45 Mngadi, Mandla 06/10/88 
46 Moeketsi, Sylvester 13/10/88 
47 Moekoena, Titus 13/10/88 
48 Mogopodi, Abraham 26/12/83 
49 Mohautse, Lebaka 21/12/88 
50 Mokodutho, Daniel 11/08/87 
51 Mongale, Lucky 24/01/84 
52 Monoto, Joy 11/08/87 
53 Moroalo, Mzimkhulu 04/10/84 
54 Motane, Lawrence 11/08/88 
55 Motladi, Masere 15/05/88 
56 Motlauthi, Zaba 21/12/88 
57 Motolo, Carnot 15/05/88 
58 Motsai, Nicholas 04/10/84 
59 Mshupa, Ramokoti Mshupa 03/03/88 
60 Msima, Joseph T (Errol Mdondo) 00/00/85 
61 Msweli, Pashe 00/00/79 
62 Mthembu, Thomas 15/05/88 
63 Mthibe, Caleb 05/02/88 
64 Mthibeli, Samson 15/05/88 
65 Mthethwa, Paulos 13/10/88 
66 Mvelo, Cyprian 10/06/88 
67 Mzilikazi, Gladman 21/12/88 
68 Ndlela, Nhlanhla Cosmos 26/12/83 
69 Ndluvu, Mbuyiseli 15/05/88 
70 Ngcobo, Ezrom 06/04/88 
71 Ngedesha, Mongameli 05/02/88 
72 Ngomane, MacMillan 13/10/88 
73 Njobe, Mwelase Xola 03/03/88 
74 Nkabinde, Elias 21/12/88 
75 Nkabinde, Simon 18/11/87 
76 Nkosana, Robert 04/06/88 
77 Nonduwa, Mzikayise 03/03/88 
78 Nontshingala, Nyameko 18/11/87 
79 Nkowana, Sonny 13/10/88 
80 Ntakwende, Leslie 21/12/88 
81 Ntsibande, Petrus 04/10/84 
82 Oliphant, David 06/10/88 
83 Phalane, Patrick 13/10/88 
84 Qupe, Nceba M. 06/10/88 
85 Radebe, Moses 05/02/88 
86 Ratsilane, Amos 04/10/84 
87 Sechai, Johannes 13/10/88 
88 Seti, Gladstone 04/10/84 
89 Shabang, Hlapang 04/10/84 
90 Sojane, Mxolisi 18/11/87 
91 Soka, Zwelibanzi 13/10/88 
92 Thobela, Thabo 05/02/88 
93 Thomas, Lungile 04/10/84 
94 Thwala, Abraham 20/05/88 
95 Tshabalala, Fani 00/00/00 
96 Ximba, Jacob 26/12/83 
97 Xolo, Michael 06/10/88 
98 Xulu, Stembiso Walter 03/03/88 
99 Zondi, Cassius 05/02/88 

COMRADES KILLED BY MUTINEERS - PANGO, ANGOLA
1 Mabitse, Patrick (Mazibuko Gibson) 00/05/84 
2 Mbaule, Raymond(Mayathula Sticks) 00/05/84 
3 Mhlebeya, Mfana Lamock(Ian Mkhwanazi) 00/05/84 
4 Mphahla, Jomo (Khumalo Jilly) 00/05/84 
5 Phungulwa, Zenzile 00/05/84 
6 Senatla, Tsotsi Samson(Mphefu Clifford) 00/05/84 
7 Sojaka, Samuel(Mehlomakhulu Fezi) 00/05/84 

ANGOLA - ACCIDENTS
1 Aridadi 00/00/87 
2 Johannes (Sethagelo Peter) 00/00/89 
3 Sibongile 00/03/86 
4 Abrahams, John - Donge R 00/00/79 
5 Dlamini, David (Jimmy Phahla) 13/02/87 
6 Gama, Albert (Mlungu Don) 00/00/84 
7 Lwana, Meshack (Lesley Duze) 00/00/84 
8 Mabukane, Ntobeko(Bhengu Smilo) 00/00/79 
9 Mabuza, Leonard (CN) 00/00/88 
10 Makaheni, Leon 00/00/84 
11 Makopane, Duluza Niel (Tsetsane Amos) 11/11/77 
12 Marks, Norman Patrick (Pule Jimmy) 00/00/83 
13 Maseko, Isaac (Sibathi Freedom) 00/00/81 
14 Masuku, Sibusiso (Themba Ndukuzempi) 00/00/00 
15 Matiwane, Mduduzi David (Ximba Ben) 00/00/88 
16 Matthews, Boiki Mogorosi (Letlola Maje) 00/00/88 
17 Mdunga (Joel Mahlathini) 00/00/81 
18 Moemibi, Sello Osborne (Gideon Magoe) 23/08/83 
19 Moloi, Oupa (CN) 00/00/81 
20 Mzobe, David (Baloi Mando) 00/00/89 
21 Ndebele, Lucky (Mkhwanazi Patrick) 00/00/87 
22 Nhlapo, Kenneth (Solly Sibeko) 00/00/00 
23 Nkuna, Styles 00/00/85 
24 Ntile, Colenso Mike(Malebane Moses) 00/00/88 
25 Seleka, Takatso Douglas(Lebohang Kitso) 00/00/84 
26 Tladi, Lazarus (Mnini Lucas) 00/00/89 
27 Zwelonke, Zulu 00/00/88 

ANGOLA - TRAINING ACCIDENTS
1 Albert, Gama (Hlungu Don) 00/00/00 
2 Khuzwayo, Irvin 00/00/00 
3 Knight, James (CN) 00/00/00 
4 Magqwashane, Ernest 00/00/00 
5 Makeni, Jola CN 00/00/00 
6 Motsoasila, Isaac 00/00/00 
7 Mzobe, David CN 00/00/00 
7 Ntini, Humphrey 00/00/00 
8 Phakathi, September CN 00/00/00 
9 Pule, Saskin Pule 00/00/00 
10 Rabkin, David 23/06/85 

MOTOR VEHICE ACCIDENTS
1 Kgobe, Jacob 00/00/00 
2 Khoza, James 00/00/00 
3 Letuku, Nathaniel 00/00/00 
4 Maki, Nosisi Cecilia 00/00/00 
5 Mapelo, Joseph 00/00/00 
6 Mashini, Kenneth 00/00/00 
7 Mavuso, Morris Mncube 00/00/00 
8 Molefe, Arios 00/00/00 
9 Morokane, Morokane 00/00/00 
10 Motaung, Lawrence 00/00/00 
11 Mthetho, CN 00/00/00 
12 Mzinyathi, Monty 00/00/00 
13 Ndlovu, John 00/00/00 
14 Ngema, Pascal 00/00/00 
15 Nqaba, Gordon 00/00/00 
16 Pule, James 00/00/00 
17 Shangase, Nomava 00/00/00 
18 Thejane, Joel 00/00/00 

UGANDA
1 Makume, Samuel Shooting accident 05/08/00
2 Msizi, Harold Car accident 30/05/91
3 Sodere, Ndumiso C.  30/07/93

BOTSWANA
1 Maluleka, Jubilee 07/09/90 
2 Moletsane, Andrew 00/00/86 
3 Titana, Themba 00/00/00 

MOZAMBIQUE
1 Nzama, Bazile 11/11/79 
2 Ilane, Patrick 11/11/79 

LESOTHO
1 Malebu, Thobela 00/00/00 
2 Mzukisi, Skweyiya 11/11/85 

ZIMBABWE
1 Mokgobu, David Lehlohonolo 12/12/83 
2 Nkondo, Victor G. 11/05/91 
3 Tshabalala, Vusi 11/11/88 

ZAMBIA
1 Minus 00/00/90 
2 Daman, Caeser T. 26/06/88 
3 Dube, Lesley 03/03/86 
4 Mashinini, Paul 20/10/90 
5 Molejane, Daniel T. 11/11/89 
6 Moloto, Daniel 06/06/91 
7 Sibanyone, Ben 27/08/85 
8 Tholo, James 00/00/89 
9 Tiro, Aaron 00/00/00 

TANZANIA
1 Christopher  
2 Chauke, Ditshabako 03/06/85 
3 Chonco, Sibusiso 00/00/00 
4 Ditshabako, Brenda 03/06/85 
5 Dywili, Mfundo 00/00/00 
6 Gagarin, Boston 00/00/00 
7 Gcina, Mziwoxolo 00/00/00 
8 Hlongwani, Vuyani 00/00/00 
9 Lesia, Ephraim 11/11/84 
10 Lokwanye, Nujoma Tolbert 03/06/85 
11 Makhubela, Lukas 02/06/89 
12 Manona, Monde 03/05/85 
13 Mbonambi, Leslie 00/00/00 
14 Mkhabela, Kholisile 09/01/82 
15 Mkhize, Nkosikhona 00/00/00 
16 Mkhize, Simphiwe 00/00/00 
17 Mkhize, Thami 00/00/00 
18 Mkgotsi, Motsei 30/04/80 
19 Mkhwanazi, Eric 00/00/00 
20 Molale, Kate 11/11/80 
21 Morabe, Mosele Eunice 03/05/85 
22 Mosala, Ernest 00/00/00 
23 Mphuthi, Majoro Benedict 05/06/85 
24 Msima, Msele 03/06/85 
25 Ndlovu, Sithembiso 00/00/00 
26 Ngubane, Mazwi 00/00/00 
27 Nhlapo, James B. 03/06/85 
28 Nxumalo, Mdu 00/00/00 
29 Sekulu, Walter 03/06/85 
30 Shandu, Thabani 00/00/00 
31 Shange, Jerry 00/00/00 
32 Shezi, Thando 00/00/92 
33 Sithole, Peter 11/11/79 

SENEGAL
1 Khalima, Maritsane Lukas Drowned 00/00/00

MISSING - As reported by the Motsuenyane Commission
1 Felix (cn) Missing in Natal 00/00/86
2 Jabu (cn) Missing in Natal 00/00/86
3 Pepe  00/00/00
4 Zola (cn) Missing in Natal 00/00/86
5 Boshomane, Abel  00/00/75
6 Ceku, Mvula  00/00/00
7 Dali, Sureboy  00/00/00
8 Galela, Champion Pebco 3 09/05/83
9 Godolozi, Qaqawuli Pebco 3 09/05/83
10 Gqirana, Mobbs  00/02/83
11 Hashe, Sipho Pebco 3 09/05/85
12 Jacob, Padi Vanished 11/11/85
13 Mapua, Tiro  00/00/00
14 Madondo, Ronald  00/00/00
15 Mlotshwa, Bokale  00/00/00
16 Molehe, Duncan  00/00/00
17 Monametsi, Dada  00/00/00
18 Mtimkulu, Siphiwo  00/00/00
19 Ngono, Mbulelo  00/00/88
20 Phala, George  00/00/00
21 Ratsoma, Modikane France  00/00/00
22 Shezi, Mandla (cn)  00/00/00
23 Thwala, Gwaza Last seen Engcobo 11/11/80

DEATHS FROM NATURAL CAUSES

MOZAMBIQUE
1 Mabhida, Moses M. 03/08/86 

G.D.R.
1 Macamba, Pasqual (Khauleza Ndawe)  00/00/00
2 Makgale, Ephraim (Mpho Mambane)  00/06/85
3 Pitso, Sello Suicide 00/00/00

U.S.S.R.
1 Kotane, Moses 19/05/78 
2 Langa, Vincent (Paul Chaba) 11/11/78 
3 Lolwane, Sidwell 15/09/91 
4 Luthuli, Mphathi P. 11/10/91 
5 Marks, J.B. 01/08/72 
6 Motsepe, Joseph 00/00/66 

UNITED KINGDOM
1 Finkelstein 00/00/94 
2 Mzala 00/00/00 
3 Baker, Lewis 18/12/93 
4 Bennun, Tollie 00/00/00 
5 Dadoo, Winnie 00/00/94 
6 Dadoo, Yusuf 11/09/83 
7 Festenstein, H. 00/00/00 
8 Feinberg, Danny 00/00/95 
9 First, Julius 00/00/001 
10 First, Tilly 00/00/00 
11 Goldberg, Annie 00/00/00 
12 Hodgson, Percy John (Jack) 03/12/77 
13 Hoogendyk, Jan 00/00/90 
14 Khan, Sam 00/00/00 
15 Katz, Freda 00/00/92 
16 Ketni, Stanley 25/09/92 
17 Lebese, Michael (Sello Moeti) 27/10/81 
18 Naicker, M.P. 29/04/77 
19 Naidoo, H.A. 00/09/70 
20 Nannan, Billy 00/00/00 
21 Ngqose, Daphne 01/06/83 
22 Phillips, James 00/00/00 
23 Rabkin, Gerald 00/00/00 
24 Ramsdale, Eddie 00/00/00 
25 Resha, Robert 07/12/73 
26 Rosenburg, Issy 00/00/00 
27 Routh, Guy 00/00/00 
28 September, Peter 00/00/95 
29 Tarshish, Jack 00/00/00 
30 Williams, Cecil 00/00/00 
31 Winter, Bishop Collin 18/11/81 
32 Yengwa, M.B. 21/07/87 

YUGOSLAVIA
1 Khayiyane, Sipho (Phillip Mangena) 01/01/86 
2 Maboee, Eleanor 00/00/00 

HUNGARY
1 Magome, David Magome  21/11/86
2 Moteka, Godfrey Suicide 21/11/86

DENMARK
1 Beck, Godfrey K. 07/06/86 

CZECHOSLOVAKIA
1 Harmel, Michael 00/00/70 

INDIA
1 Zikalala, Mbusi 11/11/88 

CANADA
1 Lungiso, Musi 07/01/90 

CUBA
1 Kates son 00/00/00 
2 La Guma, Alex 11/10/85 

U.S.A
1 Feni, Dumile 16/10/91 

ZAMBIA
1 Mrs Mtsheni 00/00/00 
2 Bawo-Dlamini, Albert 17/03/88 
3 Bawo (Mphalala Albert) 09/04/88 
4 Buthelezi, Gcina (Ngubane Lucky) 10/07/86 
5 Bucibo, Boyce 08/11/82 
6 Campbell, John Ralph 05/11/88 
7 Campoi, Siabilelo 26/11/92 
8 Cele, Ndose Paul 01/12/82 
9 Chimane, Loate 01/08/89 
10 Dalindyebo, Sabata 00/00/00 
11 Damane, Bimmy Caesar 15/07/88 
12 Dintsi, Simon (Sukiwe Verdict) 25/08/88 
13 Dlamini, Gangamshini 12/10/85 
14 Dlamini, Selby (Mnyane Gordon) 02/12/89 
15 Dllamini, Sithembile Dlamini (child) 05/12/84 
16 Edward, Lawrence(Ralph Mgcina) 27/07/88 
17 Faku, Thabile 29/01/84 
18 Fish, Gustin Dr 27/06/88 
19 Funani, Mangaliso Oscar Orlando 31/05/89 
20 Futhane, Mzala 29/01/84 
21 Govers, Harry 22/03/84 
22 Jack, Musutabantu 00/00/00 
23 Jezile, Phillip (Fumes) 00/00/78 
24 Khumalo, Philip 00/12/85 
25 Langa, Christopher Nzimeni 27/01/91 
26 Lekele, Peter 12/05/89 
27 Lloyd, Candi - Thami Mabuse 07/06/88 
28 Lubepe, Francis 03/02/90 
29 Mabaso Ndlovunga Sithole Jacab 25/12/89 
30 Mabuse, Simon Paul 00/00/00 
31 Madimola, Rethabile Patricia (child) 14/07/90 
32 Makhathini, Johnstone 17/12/88 
33 Maki, Nosisi Cecilia Maki(Nonceba Banzi) 00/00/84 
34 Malangabi, Nonkululeko 11/11/90 
35 Maloko, Bernard 28/12/85 
36 Malotoane, Martha 12/05/85 
37 Maluleka, Robert 13/11/91 
38 Mamabolo, Pamela (child) 12/09/86 
39 Mampuru, Elijah (Modise) 27/12/87 
40 Maneli, Bob 16/02/91 
41 Mangana, Nelson (Masebe Lungile) 02/10/86 
42 Mankayi, Lungile 24/04/69 
43 Manzezulu, Sheila Kukie 14/12/90 
44 Manzini, Christinah (child) 00/00/00 
45 Manzini, Xoliswa 00/00/00 
46 Maphalala, Mowa 00/00/00 
47 Maqolo, Beauty 00/00/00 
48 Masemola, Sandy 14/12/89 
49 Masoje, Johannes 08/03/89 
50 Masondo, Cecilia 04/11/90 
51 Matlou, Johnny 25/03/91 
52 Mavuso, Babili 00/00/00 
53 Maweni, Dumile 00/00/00 
54 Mbele, Masechaba 00/00/00 
55 Mbele, Thabo 00/00/00 
56 Mdletshe, Aubrey Sipho 01/01/89 
57 Mgaga, Sika (Faria Santa child) 00/00/00 
58 Mgomezulu, Gordon 20/10/90 
59 Mgudlana, Thafeni Wilton 02/11/83 
60 Mkhonto, Mendo 00/04/84 
61 Mkhwanazi, (Gumede Hlabisa) 10/04/82 
62 Mmotha, Nlwaitsile 29/05/91 
63 Mnisi, Donald 14/06/91 
64 Modise, Peter * 26/11/90 
65 Modise, Peter * 00/00/00 
66 Modise Tshepo 00/00/00 
67 Moeketsi, Bruce 12/12/90 
68 Mofokeng, Ali (Moyone Albert) 14/08/89 
69 Mogotsi, Disani 00/00/00 
70 Mokgoate, Abel 01/03/89 
71 Molefe, Buti 00/00/00 
72 Molefe, Stanley 00/00/00 
73 Moleko, Marks Daddy 08/05/90 
74 Molete, Sakie 00/00/00 
75 Moloto, Daniel 00/00/00 
76 Moloto, Daniel Mabola 06/06/91 
77 Moloto Ivy 13/06/90 
78 Monare Malani (Mathe Solly) 28/11/88 
79 Moodley Vernon 00/00/00 
80 Mophosho, Florence 09/08/85 
81 Morapedi, Shadrack 00/00/00 
82 Motaung, Tiger 20/01/80 
83 Motsuenyane, Sandy 01/11/86 
84 Msimang, Shaka 17/11/89 
85 Msomi, Dumisani 10/06/89 
86 Mtherreva, Joseph Sparks 00/08/85 
87 Mthethwa, Joseph (Shabalala Sparks) 10/08/85 
88 Mthimkulu, Richman Wandile 03/12/88 
89 Mtshali, Khanyisile (child) 00/00/00 
90 Musutabantu, Jack 19/03/91 
91 Muthupi, Tshonoko 21/05/91 
92 Mutlane, Bob 00/00/00 
93 Mvemve, Adolf 00/00/00 
94 Mvevane, Phako (Mbili Vincent Jabulani) 30/03/89 
95 Mzamo, Namhla 14/08/83 
96 Nala, Linda (Albert Mokhotle) 00/00/86 
97 Ndlovu, Brenda 00/00/00 
98 Ndlovu, Joseph 24/05/91 
99 Ndlovu, Goodwin (Ngangezwe) 00/00/00 
100 Ndlovu, Monde (Lango Nzimeni) 12/08/91 
101 Ndwane, (Dwana Lungile) 25/02/86 
102 Ndwane, Lungile 21/02/86 
103 Nkula, Hector (Makubalo Sandile) 06/12/88 
104 Nkutha, Prisca 00/00/00 
105 Nokwe, Duma 12/01/78 
106 Norshee, Sandile (child) 00/00/00 
107 Nqaphayi ,Shirley (Peter Mfene's child) 00/00/00 
108 Nyide, Eugene (Gumede Bongani) 17/05/80 
109 Nzaba, Zorro 00/00/00 
110 Phakathi, Pascal 04/07/90 
111 Pitso, James (Mabe Joe) 28/04/86 
112 Rampela, Joe 00/00/00 
113 Rantao, Christinah 13/12/89 
114 Rantokoane, Humphrey 23/12/89 
115 Rantokoane, Jackson 00/00/00 
116 Sehularo, Isaac 00/00/00 
117 Senamela, Themba 25/09/93 
118 Selomo, Ray 00/00/00 
119 Sembeya, Vorster 00/03/91 
120 Sekele, Peter 00/00/00 
121 Sethilo, Albert 00/00/00 
122 Shabangu, Mandla 00/00/00 
123 Shangase, Absolom 00/00/00 
124 Sibande, Peter 00/00/00 
125 Sibanyoni, Ben 00/00/00 
126 Sibanyoni, Rodrigues 00/00/00 
127 Simelane, Ray 00/00/00 
128 Sithole, Jacob 00/00/00 
129 Sithole, James (Mabaso Ndlovunga) 04/11/89 
130 Siza, Benny 00/00/00 
131 Sukwini, Verdict D.Simon 10/08/88 
132 Tafeni, Milton 00/00/00 
133 Tapi, Samson Monwabisi 10/09/90 
134 Tatane, George 30/10/90 
132 Thabethe, Solomon (Freddy Kalk) 10/02/86 
133 Thau, Johannes 00/00/88 
134 Tshehla, Mathi (Looksmart) M. David * 16/08/89 
135 Thwalo Thabo 08/03/90 
136 Vilakazi, Sipho * 23/11/85 
137 Xaba, Timothy Dinasdo * 27/01/9 
138 Mabatle David Tshehla (Mathi Looksmart) * 16/05/89 
139 Dumakude (Ndlela Christopher) 20/05/89 
140 Speedo, Dudu 00/00/00 
141 Tsie, Joseph Parker 13/05/85 
142 Vilakazi Sipho * 00/00/00 
143 Vundla, Jabu 00/00/00 
144 Wesi, Kenny (Shabalala Nicholas Dube) 18/11/89 
145 Xaba, Timothy Dinamo * 00/00/00 
146 Yekiso, Sandile 19/02/79 
147 Zikhali, Artwell 05/10/87 
148 Zondo Thomas Petros 07/12/88 
149 Zulu, Thami 14/09/89 
150 Zami, Joe 00/05/84 

BOTSWANA
1 Gaetsewe John T. 01/02/88 
2 Liphoko, Patrick D. 11/11/81 
3 Malunga, Reuben 00/00/00 
4 Ngwenya, Johannes 14/06/87 

ANGOLA
1 Bhongo, Khululani 11/06/84 
2 Dladla, Jackson 04/10/84 
3 Dlamini, Douglas 23/10/82 
4 Dube, Lesley 00/00/84 
5 Dube, Moses Sesule (Prof Thabiso) 30/04/86 
6 Gazongo, James M. 30/04/83 
7 Henne, Zingisile 18/04/91 
8 Jabanje, Levy Tebejane (Lee Bond) 00/00/00 
9 Jonas, Zakhele 00/00/84 
10 Khethelo, Johannes 00/00/87 
11 Khuzwayo, Dingane 14/04/84 
12 Klaas, Jan (Leon Adams) 00/00/00 
13 Lawrence, Edward (Ralph Mgcina) 27/07/88 
14 Mabuza, Reginald 11/11/83 
15 Macamba, Pascal 17/03/82 
16 Mahlangu, Ben Vusi 11/11/82 
17 Manaka, Sabata (Tsepo Nkosi) 00/00/00 
18 Manong, Philly 11/11/84 
19 Masondo, Jacob 09/09/83 
20 Mazibuko, Isaac Melusi (Sam Boom) 09/03/87 
21 Mazibuko, Pappie 00/00/83 
22 Mbatha, Sabelo T. 18/04/86 
23 Mbatha, Sam 11/11/88 
24 Mbele, Stanza S. 12/02/84 
25 Mira, Bulumko Mirha 05/02/86 
26 Mohlala, Daniel 11/11/81 
27 Morton, Peter Wouter (Phil Pieters) 28/03/87 
28 Mosia, Aaron 00/00/00 
29 Motsoenang, Ernest 00/00/93 
30 Msimang, Tyson Sibusiso Msimang 12/08/83 
31 Mthubi, Theodore 08/11/78 
32 Moses, Myeza 04/06/84 
33 Munisi, Lentikile Magome Munisi (S Sithole) 00/00/85 
34 Naidoo, Balakrishna Ramalu (Joe Davidson) 23/08/80 
35 Nala, Borne Jericho (Isso Pilane) 00/00/00 
36 Ngele, Selby 00/00/84 
37 Nhlapo, Kenneth 02/03/84 
38 Njaba, Zoro 00/00/00 
39 Nkonjiwa, Solomzi Simon (P Mthimkhulu) 00/00/85 
40 Nonelikana, Samson Nonelikana 00/00/00 
41 Phakani, Boykie 11/11/87 
42 Phakathi Lucas 10/11/83 
43 Plaatjie, Maxwell Plaatjie 04/01/82 
44 Sonti, Linda Xola 01/06/83 
45 Tiro, Abrahm 10/11/76 
46 Tsakane, Phillip 00/00/81 
47 Velaphi, Kenneth (Mninzi Masilela) 02/08/83 
48 Yende Prudence 05/03/83 

UGANDA
1 Buthelezi, Duncan 27/01/92 
2 Habase, Andile 26/11/92 
3 Malaza, Sipho N 09/02/93 
4 Masenoli, Teboho Benny Tricia 12/05/93 
5 Mashini, Duncan 26/01/92 
6 Mathe, Joel Jabulane 28/03/92 
7 Mbatha, Marg 04/12/00 
8 Mbatha, Mxolisi 03/12/92 
9 Mlindazwe, Thamsanqa 29/12/92 
10 Molefe, M.Samuel 05/07/93 
11 Mokgothu, A.K. 18/06/93 
12 Mokoena, Thabo 25/05/91 
13 Nene, Thulani 22/04/93 
14 Ngityane, Simphiwe M 13/04/92 
15 Nqose, Themba 13/03/92 
16 Shangase, Thami 05/06/93 
17 Shelembe, Oscar 16/12/92 
18 Tsame, Fikile 26/12/92 

LESOTHO
1 Baloyi, Jacob N 00/00/00 
2 Leshoro, Robert 00/00/00 
3 Medupi, Staloko 00/00/00 
4 Modisane, Jerry 00/00/83 

TANZANIA
1 Maria 06/08/89 
2 Paul (Jewel) 00/00/86 
3 Anthony, James 09/09/91 
4 Baepi, Sanny 11/07/91 
5 Banda, (Boy Nkomo Dlamini) 31/03/85 
6 Bengu, Dumisane 23/05/90 
7 Bhedava, John 05/05/86 
8 Billy, Preston 23/10/88 
9 Botha, Zanethemba Michael 18/05/89 
10 Dlamini, Fikile 00/00/00 
11 Dlamini, Mavela 22/05/79 
12 Dlamini, Mzanempi 16/04/84 
13 Dubula, Isaac 23/07/91 
14 Duma, Martine 23/09/86 
15 Essop, Yunus Ahmed 00/00/78 
16 Hashe, Govan Mantyi 00/00/00 
17 Jones, Hekelia Mark 08/01/85 
18 Kaloli, Thamsanga 23/12/90 
19 Keke, Steven 16/06/90 
20 Kgori, Bennedict 06/07/81 
21 Kgozi, Benedict 16/06/91 
22 Khaya, Major 23/12/90 
23 Khumalo, Sithembile T. 03/04/84 
24 Kozi, Hoshe 16/06/92 
25 Lebo, Ena 01/06/89 
26 Madiba, Aaron 12/02/86 
27 Madingwane, Stephen 19/12/90 
28 Magashule, Sefelaro 00/00/00 
29 Magxala, Themba 23/05/90 
30 Majola, Leocadia Lungi 21/01/90 
31 Makhalabeni, Vincent Kgasago 06/08/89 
32 Makhaya, Autonio 12/05/90 
33 Makhubelo, Lucas 02/00/00 
34 Malati, Chico 20/07/84 
35 Maphosa, Absalom 21/01/91 
36 Maseko, Freddy 03/01/87 
37 Mashlasela, Otto 31/07/85 
38 Matshoge, Abraham 11/11/70 
39 May, Aspin A. 00/00/00 
40 May, Andile 25/10/91 
41 Mbali, Jackson 00/00/00 
42 Mkhabela, Kholisile 17/09/82 
43 Moabi, Justice 08/07/79 
44 Mochous, Anita Mojabeng 22/06/91 
45 Mojalefa, Solomon 01/01/91 
46 Mokgale, Lentsoe 08/09/87 
47 Mokgatle, Maggie 15/11/91 
48 Mokhebe, Regina 05/09/85 
49 Mokhele, Trevor 11/11/90 
50 Molakoane, Piet 01/05/93 
51 Monase, Boy Lelele 00/00/89 
52 Monyane, Matlala 23/09/90 
53 Morake, Simon 05/04/91 
54 Mosala, Patrick 03/07/93 
55 Mosagale, Koboatau 08/05/89 
56 Mosupye, Fitzgerald 26/02/90 
57 Moutsusi, Pelokgale 08/11/89 
58 Mothibe, Christopher 13/01/87 
59 Mphale, Morgan 03/03/93 
60 Mvela, Allen 23/12/90 
61 Mziba, Shadrack 07/11/84 
62 Ncube, Linda Ncube 31/07/85 
63 Nduku, Knox 00/00/0 
64 Nkadimeng, Elija Mandela 21/01/93 
65 Nkilash, Shani 10/12/91 
66 Nteyi, Andile 13/04/83 
67 Ntshangane, Elliot 00/00/00 
68 Nxumalo, Victor Nxumalo 00/00/00 
69 Peterson, Micheal 24/08/90 
70 Phako, Mary Phako 00/00/87 
71 Pindiwe, Steven 09/12/90 
72 Pindiwe, Vicker 28/04/90 
73 Pule, Steve 28/01/93 
74 Rantau, Christopher 00/00/00 
75 Rasecho, Alias 17/09/82 
76 Rasetshu, Elias 00/00/00 
77 Shabalala, Amos 01/05/89 
78 Shabangu, Mandla 04/06/83 
79 Sebugudi, Ntrouko 15/10/90 
80 Selepe, Donald 00/00/00 
81 Seperepere, Mamping 27/02/81 
82 Sethole, Khulekane Innocent 27/05/92 
83 Setiko, Patrick 00/00/89 
84 Siramane, Phillip Siramane 10/08/89 
85 Sithole, Peter 30/04/80 
86 Skhosana, Mzwakhe 06/11/89 
86 Thabethe, Bhekithemba 30/06/63 
87 Thile, Mark Langa 16/04/84 
88 Twasi, Chiao 20/07/84 
89 Voyi, Sizile William 08/10/91 
90 Weinberg, Eli 18/07/81 
91 Zama, Maureen 12/01/88 
92 Zono, Lamula 28/05/84 
93 Zungu, Funani 11/04/86 

ETHIOPIA
1 Ngasi, Kholisile  
2 Ndungane, James  

NIGERIA
1 Karabo, Freda 19/10/92 
2 Ketani, Stanley 25/09/92 

KENYA
1 Aunt Mary 00/00/00 
2 Bernad 00/00/00 
3 Old Masilela 00/00/00 
4 Eliana, Gertz 00/00/00 
5 Lailaje, Charles 00/00/00 
6 Lebele, Frank 00/00/00 
7 Letladi, Patrick 00/00/00 
8 Lubisi, Andy 00/00/00 
9 Mabusa, Thoko 00/00/00 
10 Make, Dairaley 16/09/92 
11 Makhubu, Lawrence 00/00/00 
12 Matela, Walter 00/00/00 
13 Mngadi, Vincent Mngadi 00/00/00 
14 Moegabudi, Sam 00/00/00 
15 Mokatsane, Oupa 00/00/00 
16 Moreng, Oupa 00/00/00 
17 Mosimane, Johannes 00/00/00 
18 Mthembu, Debra 00/00/00 
19 Pama, Sisa 00/00/00 
20 Pholos, Ethel Junior Pinki 31/10/91 
21 Phunga, Kid 00/00/00 
22 Watts, Agnes 00/00/00 



SUICIDES


ZAMBIA
1 Mabatla, David T 11/11/89 
2 Modise, Majoba 11/11/79 
3 Mgudlwa, Mackay Davashe 02/11/82 
4 Phiri, Joseph 13/05/85 
5 Sibanyoni, Diagon-Roderick 27/10/87 
6 Yesiko, Sandile Danisile 1/11/79 

ANGOLA
7 Dalamba, Siseko 00/00/81 
8 Jona, Zakhele (Masupha Jonge) 16/11/84 
9 Lethuso, Doctor 10/04/81 
10 Madakeni, Leon 00/00/81 
11 Mafika, Stanley 11/08/90 
12 Mandlenkosi, Sifiso 11/11/90 
13 Mangana, Tebogo 09/03/83 
14 Maphetho, Moses 00/00/77 
15 Maphumulo, Reginald 11/11/90 
16 Mashaya, Solomon 00/00/81 
17 Masuku, Sibusiso 00/00/00 
18 Mayaka, Ndumiso 00/00/79 
19 Mchunu, Victor 13/11/88 
20 Miya, Matthews 11/11/89 
21 Mlangeni, Johannes 07/02/84 
22 Mohlala, Ceasar 22/01/84 
23 Mojapelo, Ethel 00/00/77 
24 Molani, Bolosha 00/11/88 
25 Moloi, Thapelo 05/03/83 
26 Motau, Samuel 11/11/81 
27 Mosia, Michael 30/01/82 
28 Ngcobo, Nkosinathi 07/02/84 
29 Ngobese, Humphrey 11/11/83 
30 Nkolonga, Daniel 04/10/88 
31 Nkomo, Bongani 29/06/87 
32 Nkondo, Boetie Ephraim (Zaba Maledza) 00/07/84 
33 Nkosi, Johannes 23/06/85 
34 Ntila, Mike 30/04/83 
35 Nyangiwe, Sithembiso 30/12/86 
36 Phosa, Moses 02/12/90 
37 Shange, Wiseman 00/00/00 
38 Tshabalala, Amos 08/12/87 
39 Tshabalala, Mpini 05/11/84 
40 Ventolo, Michael * 00/00/85 
41 Wasa, Nkululeko 20/04/86 

UGANDA
1 Zondani, Mkhuseli 10/10/90 

LESOTHO
1 Ventloolo, Michael * 11/11/85 

G.D.R.
1 Pitso, Sello 00/00/00 

HUNGARY
1 Moteka, Godfrey 28/11/88 




EXECUTED BY ORDER OF OUR MILITARY TRIBUNAL



ANGOLA
1 Bosigo, Mompati Godfrey (K Sipho Oshkosh) 00/00/84 
2 Davids, Ephraim Ivan Adam (Lejoe Sibusiso) 00/00/80 
3 Dintsi, Samson Isaac (Tshabalala Justice) 00/00/81 
4 Dlamini, George Perm (Muntu Ndebele) 00/00/00 
5 Duma, Gcina 00/00/84 
6 Dumela, David (Dick P.D. Khumalo) 00/00/82 
7 Hlongwane, B. Sydney (Mavuso Dick) 00/00/88 
8 Hlophe, Joseph Arsenius(Jabu Zikalala) 00/00/81 
9 Hoyi, Cekiso (Msomi Ronald) 00/00/84 
10 Jele, Reuben Mandla(Nyembezi Stopper) 00/00/84 
11 Joyce, Thoby Steven (Escom Maluleka) 00/00/82 
12 Lafasi, Clifford Nqaba (Raymond Mavundla) 20/06/83 
13 Leballo, Boithlomo Derrick (Mayekiso Vusi) 00/00/81 
14 Mabaso, Daniel Crosby(Tommy Shenge) 00/00/84 
15 Maga, Eric(Jongile Mzwandile) 00/00/84 
16 Malebane, Pule Moses (Elliot Mazibuko) 00/00/84 
17 Maleka, Kagiso Jeremia (Mdingi Zweni) 00/00/89 
18 Maleke, Nikita John 00/00/82 
19 Malope, Edward (Mashiani Joseph) 00/00/84 
20 Makudubethe, Thabo (Moore N. Ruphus) 00/00/84 
21 Mamba, Mlamli(Mkambi James) 00/00/84 
22 Mangena, Phillip (Chiloane Drake) 00/00/82 
23 Mohlabane, Josiah (Dumakude Shaka) 00/00/89 
24 Mokoena, Joseph Moeketsi, (Balila Mpila) 00/00/80 
25 Monamoli, Buki France (Simon Mabunu) 00/00/00 
26 Montshioa, Matlaku (Mogale Simon) 00/00/84 
27 Motswane, Jackson Jones (Jackson Jones) 00/00/84 
28 Moshoeu, Paki Gabriel(Rogers Mayalo) 00/00/84 
29 Ngubane, Daniel (Peter Morule) 00/00/84 
30 Ondala, Irvin Vusimuzi (Mashiqane Wandile) 00/00/84 
31 Pieterson, Joseph (Sereledi Michael) 00/00/84 
32 Radebe, Jabu Radebe (Emmanuel Vilakazi) 00/00/84 
33 Seremane, K. Timothy (Mahamba Kenneth) 00/00/81 
34 Tanisi, Maxwell (Hobo Walter) 00/00/84 

* Please note that while this list is as comprehensive and accurate as
possible, it is not complete. There are a number of discrepancies and
ommissions which require further investigation and research.
===========================================================================



