TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

THE AZANIAN PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY SUBMISSION



INTRODUCTION



In the presentation of the Pan Africanist Congress, we promised that this
second presentation would concentrate on the mandate of the Azanian
People's Liberation Army (APLA) which was earlier known as POQO. The
dictionary meaning of the word mandate is the "power or a command given
by someone in higher authority". The formation of APLA was inspired by
the need to pursue the most noble of causes; the liberation of mankind.
The highest authority from which APLA derived its mandate was the PAC
Congress, the highest body that charted the PAC's policy and programme.



We must, however, restate our previous position. As a matter of principle
we do not see the armed struggle, which constituted the major part of the
mandate, as something to apologize for. APLA's mandate was not only
necessary but critical in overthrowing the most oppressive system of
modern times. We remind those who have chosen to forget that this is the
system, that the international community had declared a crime aghast
humanity.



In South Africa, there are three liberation movements which had military
wings, of these only two were recognized by the United Nations, the
Organization of African Unity, and the Non-Aligned Movement.



Throughout this presentation, we shall therefore insist that it is a
shame and a mockery of justice to equate the activities of those who
fought against injustice with those of the architects of injustice. Those
who fought to preserve oppression together with those who fought for the
liberation of mankind have all received a new status of being gross
violators of human rights.



PAYING THE PRICE



We have been called upon to accept and to pay the price of freedom and
democracy through reconciliation. The dictionary meaning of
reconciliation is "harmonizing or bringing back into friendship".
However, in the context of South Africa, reconciliation is equated with
the establishment and the process of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC). The process of the TRC however, starts from an
unfortunate premise that APLA's activities were nothing else but gross
violations of human rights allegedly committed within the period of its
mandate. We reject this premise. Whilst we acknowledge, with honour, the
TRC's mandate to promote national unity and reconciliation, we find it
abhorrent that the very system that was intended to bring us freedom and
would have brought genuine freedom to our people, demands that the forces
of injustice which perpetrated the atrocities of apartheid be equated
with those of the liberation movements. We are now put in the same dock
as the victims and the architects of injustice.



Whilst we do not intend to engage the TRC in unnecessary political
arguments, it suffices to reiterate the legitimacy of our actions, lest
we allow those who have chosen to remain oblivious of the truth and
historical facts to achieve their desire by criminalising our actions.



Our major goal is to highlight the plight of hundreds of APLA/PAC members
who are still languishing in prison while their pleas for release fall on
deaf ears. It is surprising that today the very people who sacrificed
their lives and futures in defence of human rights are criminalised and
are expected to apologize for their role in the overthrow of the
apartheid regime. We still wish to witness a moment in which the first
APLA/PAC member will be granted amnesty by the TRC's Amnesty Committee.
It is in this context therefore, that we make this submission and we are
sure that history will vindicate our approach of refusing to apologize
for defending ourselves as a nation through armed struggle.



THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT



When the PAC was formed in 1959, no provision was made in its operational
structures for the establishment of a military wing. That situation
changed with the massacre of our people at Sharpville and Langa in the
opening days of our positive action campaign launched on March 1960. In
September 1961, the foundation for the military wing of the PAC was laid
by Comrades John Nyathi Pokela and Clarence Mlali Makwetu. The
Presidential Council, based in Maseru subsequently appointed one of its
members as Commander to head its military activities. The reconciliation
conference of members of the National Executive Committee abroad held in
Moshi, United Republic of Tanzania in 1967, endorsed the organization's
stand on an armed struggle and set-up a revolutionary command, in
recognition of the exigencies of armed struggle, to set-up and supervise
the strategic and policy tasks of the armed struggle.



The revolutionary command took up the political command of the High
Command that had already been established. The hierarchy was reviewed in
1971 and later, a Military Commission as a sub-organ of the Central
Committee was established to direct the work of the High Command. In the
review of the structures of the party, at the consultative conference in
Arusha in mid-1978, the name Military Committee was replaced by that of
the Military Commission. The Chairman and two other members of the
Central Committee were designated as members of the Military Commission
which would also be responsible for the appointment of members of the
High Command. The Military Commission subsequently drew up on behalf of
the Central Committee, the Directive for APLA which outlined the
operational instructions and military doctrine of the PAC. The Military
Commission was later expanded to accommodate the new military structure.



Stemming from this historical context, the APLA eventually evolved a
competent organizational structure that was to oversee the effective
implementation of the armed struggle.



PROGRAMME OF ACTION



The starting point of the armed struggle was to consider our mandate on
the basis of the concrete situation between ourselves and the enemy we
were facing. Our mandate was to organize and lead the armed struggle. The
matter of what to do and how to define the political leadership's
responsibility. APLA's responsibility was how to do it. The key to the
matter was whether we were capable of putting our struggle on the correct
political line and employing correct methods of struggle. The crux of the
matter was to satisfy ourselves within the limits of our understanding,
that we could set our struggle on a correct course of development. And
that was to develop military operations to the level where they served
political objectives and achieved the anticipated results.



The enemy of the liberation movement of South Africa and of its people
was always the settler Colonial regime of South Africa. Reduced to its
simplest form, the apartheid regime meant, white domination not
leadership, but control and supremacy. This was the desire of the white
man to continue to protect himself from the "swart gevaar" the "black
danger". The pillars of apartheid, protecting white South Africa from the
black danger were the military and the process of arming of the entire
white South African society. This militarisation therefore, of necessity
made every white citizen a member of the security establishment. Whilst
uniformed men and women engaged in border and cross-border operations,
non-uniformed men and women became the pillar of the so-called rear-arear
protection.



It would therefore be a fallacy in the context of white South Africa to
talk about innocent civilians. Military trained and armed civilians defy
the definition of civilians. To us an attack on a trained and armed
individual was a military operation. It is in this context therefore that
the Azanian People's Liberation Army did not have the burden or problem
of the so-called "soft or hard target". In all honesty, the terms "soft
or hard" targets did not exist in our vocabulary. All that mattered was
the political and pycholological benefit that the organisation would
derive from such military operations.



It should be noted that the killing of genuine African civilians had
intensified. Africans attending night vigils, commuting to work, in
Boipatong etc. were brutally massacred whilst the white community lived
in tranquility. The decision was aimed at carrying out legitimate
reprisals and forcing the regime to end the killings of African
civilians. This was done both in reprisal and self-defence. The only
requirement was proportionality. It should therefore not surprise anyone
that targets like the St James Church, King William'stown Golf Club,
Heilderberg Tavern etc. were selected. The leadership of the APLA takes
full responsibility for all these operations. The APLA forces who carried
out these operations followed the directives from their commanders and
these directives were from the highest echelons of the military
leadership. We do not therefore, regret that such operations took place
and there is therefore nothing to apologize for.



PUTTING THE RECORD STRAIGHT



From 1978 to 1984 the PAC had an unstable existence particularly in
Tanzania. This is a period in which internal conflicts made a serious
dent on the organization's image and performance.



As a result of these internal disputes, a consultative conference was
held in Arusha, Tanzania in 1978. This conference resulted in the
expulsion of over 60 members. The expelled members subsequently formed an
organisation called the Azanian People's Revolutionary Party (APRP).
Despite these expulsions, the organisation continued to be unstable.
Subsequently clear conflicts emerged and namely:



(a) The internal leadership conflicts

(b) Conflicts between the leadership and cadres



The internal leadership conflicts resulted in the expulsion of the then
Chairman of the Central Committee, P.K. Leballo and a few other members
who allegedly were his supporters. The conflict between the cadres and
leadership on the other hand resulted in the death of the members of the
PAC triumvirate, David Maphumzana Sibeko who was shot and killed by six
APLA cadres who were dispatched from the military camp in Itumbi. The six
APLA cadres were arrested and subsequently sentenced to an effective 15
years each by the Tanzanian High Court and therefore cannot be made an
issue anymore as they were formally charged and sentenced.



Consequently, the remaining PAC leadership lost total control of the
forces at Itumbi Camp. Eventually the Tanzanian Defence Force intervened
and in the operation to wrest control over the camp, four APLA cadres
were killed by the Tanzanian Defence Force (TDF).



Meanwhile dissensions among the APLA cadres in the camp resulted in
disappearance of an APLA cadre, by the name of Owen Ntuli. Allegations
were made that he was murdered at the camp but these allegations were
never confirmed.



After the arrival of Cde John Nyathi Pokela in 1981 after serving his
thirteen years on Robben Island, Cde Pokela upon his arrival was
unanimously elected Chairman of the Pan Africanist Congress. His main
priority was to re-unite the PAC and eventually a call was made for all
PAC members who were either expelled or had left on their own to come
back into the fold and rejoin the organisation. This call received a
positive response and even those members who had formed the APRP
unconditionally returned to the ranks of the PAC.



APLA'S HUMAN RIGHTS RECORD



Every APLA cadre was entitled to the constitutional rights afforded by
the PAC constitution and disciplinary code. However, those rights were
tempered with the practical needs of good order and discipline necessary
to maintain a military force. Therefore, APLA faced the dilemma of
maintaining military discipline whilst creating a system of justice where
individual APLA members were afforded maximum rights prescribed by the
PAC constitution. Note should be taken of the fact that APLA members were
not employees but volunteers who were prepared to sacrifice their lives
without expecting anything. Their only reward would be that the apartheid
regime of South Africa would eventually be overthrown. Putting it simply,
APLA cadres were not just soldiers living on orders but political
fighters who had a say in how they should be led and commanded.



The rights that were afforded APLA cadres can be grouped into three:



1. The right to equal treatment



2. The right of individual APLA members to have open and fair
participation in the process of decision making that affected their lives
and well being.



3. The right to express opinions, to information, to attend meetings,
make contributions and be directly involved in the political life of the
organisation. These rights were essential, and they ensured the following:



(a) High morale

(b) Confidence in the leadership and its decisions

(c) Fair selection of the most capable personnel for promotion,
additional training, deployment, etc.

(d) General respect for the organisation.

(e) Security of the members.



Whilst we cannot boast of having had a perfect human rights record, we
however, can with pride insist that we did everything we could to
protect. As an organisation and as an institution, we take pride in
informing the South African nation that in our entire period of
existence, we never had a single detention camp, prison or any form of
institution that was employed to violate members' human rights. No single
individual can genuinely claim any experience of systematic torture,
abuse or detentions in any of our facilities or camps.



The so-called murders in the PAC camps that the TRC has chosen to
sensationalise and blow out of proportion are acts that APLA will never
be ashamed of. Whilst we regret any loss of life as a result of our
disciplinary actions, we however still remain proud that the disciplinary
actions that were taken fell within the confines of our disciplinary code
and oath of allegiance.



We must consider the concrete and practical reality of the environment
and circumstances that determined the continued existence of our
organisation and its ability to carry out its functions of liberation. We
could not hope to survive and to expand our activities without
eliminating or demobilising the forces of destabilisation. Only one
authority could survive or our organisation would have remained in a
state of permanent instability and therefore fail to carry out its
mandate. We have already alluded to the period of instability that the
PAC went through until the arrival of Comrade John Nyathi Pokela. The
organisation could therefore not tolerate any further forms of
destabilisation and subversion such as those carried out by the
individuals concerned.



Whilst we accept full responsibility for our disciplinary actions, we
however take great exception when anyone would abuse the Promotion of
National Unity and Reconciliation Act, No. 34, 1995 to criminalise our
members and therefore distort facts and spread rumours and lies. It is
surprising to us that before we even present our case, the TRC is already
talking about murders in our camps. If this is not a deliberate attempt
to criminalise the Azanian People's Liberation Army, then what is it? It
is shocking to note that such educated and legally qualified men and
women can loosely refer to deaths as murders. Whilst we are laymen, we
however, know the difference between death and murder. It is this little
knowledge that give us an impression that either the entire TRC or some
members thereof while acknowledging our right to reconcile have chosen to
antagonise us for some political gain best known to the TRC and/or those
individuals. To make matters even worse, in the TRC's correspondence with
us terms like treachery and cruelty are used and why we do not know. Be
that as it may, we however, still believe that the record should have
been put straight by the end of our presentation. It is true that a
number of deaths did actually take place not only in our camps but in
most areas where we had a presence. These deaths can be categorised into
the following:



(a) Natural causes

(b) Accidents (mostly vehicle)

(c) Murders such as those of Cde Benedict Sondlo

(d) Executions



NATURAL CAUSES



A number of PAC/APLA members died as a result of natural illnesses
particularly malaria. A list can be made available of all the members and
wherever possible, even the nature of illnesses members suffered from.
The Tanzanian government and other relevant authorities may be contacted
to very these lists.



ACCIDENTS



A number of accidents in the entire period of our existence took place in
most of the countries where we operated. These accidents can be put into
different categories namely:



(a) Vehicle accidents - which were the majority of accidents that even
claimed the lives of two APLA commanders i.e. General Victor Gqweta and
Sabela Phama and General Phiri Bonke.

(b) Non vehicle accidents e.g. members who drowned.



MURDERS



A number of murders did actually occur as well. These are called murders
for they had nothing to do with any APLA programmes and discipline. In
all these cases, the law took its course and those who committed these
acts were charged in courts of law and served their sentences. Among
these cases, is that of Cde Benny Sondlo, who was stabbed to death by a
PAC member who was eventually charged and sentenced in a court of law.



EXECUTIONS



A limited number of APLA members were executed mostly for acts of
destabilisation. These members were executed by orders of the APLA
Commander who in his own capacity determined the individuals who had to
perform the task(s). We would prefer not to present the list of these
members's during this presentation but a copy of all known members will
be submitted.



The aim of the categorisation of the abovementioned cases is twofold.
Firstly, it is to remove the myth that all the members who died were
murdered. Secondly, it is to put into correct perspective, APLA's human
rights record that is deliberately being tarnished by people whose only
agenda could be to criminalise our activities and therefore deny amnesty
to our members who are still languishing in the South African jails. We
will go to any extent to satisfactorily answer any question that we may
be called upon to answer. The only request we wish to make is that we
should confine ourselves to the truth for the truth is only what happened
not what we wish or consider to have happened. We are therefore here
within the confines of what we know, to tell the truth and not tell what
some people may want to hear.



NATURE OF OUR OPERATIONS



When we discussed our programme of action above, we endeavoured to define
our targets and enemy. Our presentation will however be incomplete if we
do not correct the sensationalised and maligned acts of repossession. We
would like to clarify once and for all that we have never engaged in
armed robberies. It is only criminals that engage in armed robberies. We
have always mentioned that our major source of income was repossession.
From its inception, the PAC categorically stated that our land and its
resources were usurped through the force of arms. It was APLA's
responsibility to repossess what rightfully belonged to the oppressed and
dispossessed Azanian people. It is in this context that we proudly and
openly mentioned it that banks and other financial institutions were
targeted. We still remain proud and open about these acts because they
fell within the PAC's political and ideological perspective. We therefore
do not take kindly to allegations that we were armed robbers. Robbers are
those who steal and defraud and not those who repossess what rightfully
belongs to them.



APLA'S EXPECTATIONS FROM THE TRC



APLA has viewed with shock and dismay the privileges enjoyed by those who
murdered and maimed the African people in the name of apartheid. If
people like Dirk Coetzee and Brian Mitchell could receive amnesty, what
is it that can make any APLA member not deserve amnesty. We still remain
puzzled with regard to the attitude of the TRC in as far as APLA and the
PAC members' applications are concerned. To date not a single APLA/PAC
member has been granted amnesty. However, the trend we see now is that of
turning down our applications. The only impression we have at this point
is that TRC has a political agenda to criminalise APLA's activities
thereby discrediting any of our achievements. Only history will prove us
wrong because we still have to see anything different. For instance, we
are still surprised as to why there has been no enquiries into the deaths
of PAC members that have no negative connotations to the PAC and APLA. We
have so far not heard of any enquiries concerning the deaths of Jeff
Masemola, Comrade Mpendulo's children in Umtata, Cde Pokela, Victor
Gqweta and many others. The only enquiries are those that have an aim to
prove and expose the perceived negative side of human rights violations
by the PAC/APLA. When are we going to enquire on gross human rights
violations against PAC/APLA members? Maybe sooner than later, we hope.





