ADV POTGIETER


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2: 27 NOVEMBER 1996



SUBMISSION, QUESTION AND ANSWERS

CHRIS BATEMAN



ADV POTGIETER:

Chairperson, the next witness is Mr Chris Bateman, will you please come
forward? … end of Tape 2, side B ... Good afternoon Mr Bateman.

MR BATEMAN

Good afternoon.

ADV POTGIETER:

Welcome.

MR BATEMAN

Thank you.

ADV POTGIETER:

Before we listen to your testimony I am going ask you to take the oath.



MR BATEMAN					Duly sworn states



ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much, you may be seated. My colleague Glenda Wildschut
will assist you in giving your testimony.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Good afternoon Chris - Mr Bateman. You have been with us for a while now.
You came to the briefing meetings we had over the weekend and it is now
afternoon. Thank you very much for coming.

You have handed us a written statement as well. We have been hearing the
stories of the mothers of the seven young men who were killed - some of
the mothers of the seven young men. We have heard the witnesses to this
incident. And I wonder whether you would like to tell us your experience
- what happened and what you can recall from the incident that happened
3rd of March 1986.

MR BATEMAN

Sure I was the Cape Times crime reporter at the time and arrived on March
the 3rd arrived at the Thomas Boydell Police headquarters, for the daily
9 am crime conference. The briefing room was deserted, there was nobody
there. And I concluded that either they had a quick conference or
something major had happened. The latter was the case, I soon discovered,
so I went out to where I discovered the incident had happened, to
Guguletu, outside the Dairy Belle hostel.

And there I found a cordoned off scene with a Casspir in the middle. I
think the police had roped it off, whatever it was, it was a cordoned off
scene and the crowd had gathered around. I am uncertain as to whether
there was still bodies on the road - in the course of my reporting duties
we have seen lots of bodies - I cannot remember. I seem to remember the
in fact they were cleaning up the blood on the road at the time I arrived.

I saw, I found Lieutenant Attie Loubser, who was the Police liaison
officer at the time on the scene and went up to him and said - Attie what
happened? And he said, sorry, you going to have to talk to Pretoria on
this one. So I said, come on, it is a local event. And he was adamant
that we would have to d to get our information from Pretoria which is
partly what subsequently happened.

The police lifted the cordon and we were kept back. They lifted the
cordon and they withdrew. The crowd was fairly hostile, but peaceful and
I looked around and the most obvious place to find eyewitnesses seemed to
be in the Dairy Belle hostel, because it was over looking the actual
scene, so I went in. I was reminded when, in spite I was testifying now,
that in fact, I did speak to the security guy first who pointed me to
where I subsequently - I think I first I found Bowers Mazonke, who isn’t
here today. And he gave me a version of events, about a shoot-out between
the police and a group of men.

And then I went upstairs, as I remember, and in one of the dormitories -
and it was a while back, you have to forgive me for perhaps being
imprecise. I think it was Cecil Mthutu who I saw first and he described
the tail end of the shoot out, in which opposite the dormitory we were
in, under a gum tree, police had walked up to a guy - to one of the
people they had shot and had in fact fired a bullet into him. While he
was per strayed on the ground.

Then there was a separate incident and as I remember, this was General
Sibaca who told me this - that there was a guy who either came out from
the bushes or was near the bushes at another spot on the other side of
the road - as I remember. And police had walked up to him, confronted
him, again I was reminded about the kneeing and the belly and the kicking
beforehand. I had in fact forgotten that detail.

And the policeman opposite them, sort of turned around and looked for
some kind of confirmation which he got from a - I imagine a senior
officer. This is General’s relation of events to me and he turned back
around and then shot this guy at virtual point blank range.

I was struck by the similarity of the versions between Bowers Mazonke who
spoke about the gum tree incident and Cecil Mthutu and General Sibaca.
And I remember saying to them, I spoke in Xhosa to them, or Xhosa/Zulu. I
can speak first language Zulu, that this is quite a serious offense. You
realize what you are saying? What you are saying has great implications
and they were adamant that in fact that is what has happened.

So, I went back to the office, subsequently found out that the policeman
who were involved in the shooting were available and at, because we were
getting nothing from Pretoria of any precision or any detail. Bishop
Lavis police station - as I remember, we went to a police station, it may
well have been Bishop Lavis. Where I in fact interviewed the policeman
who were involved in the actual shoot out. And they gave me their version
of events.

The editor that night at conference, questioned me quite closely. It was
Tony Heard and decided that we would run with the stories. And we ran -
as I remember across the strap - the top of the front page was - man with
hands in air shot gun down - words of that affect. And then the body of
the paper - the lead story was in fact the version as was given by the
policeman involved in the story.

A couple of days later a general, not a general, he was a Major Mostert -
whom I knew from my crime reporting duties came into the newsroom and put
an affidavit of sorts in front of me and I think a similar one to Tony
Weaver, my colleague. It said in a very sort of [indistinct] fashion -
Chris, just sign this and this will be all over and it will be sorted out
and I politely declined.

And we - and we then got our lawyers involved. And what followed was a -
what I didn’t realize - the police had already got to Sibaca at that
stage and we then - with the help of the late Tian van der Merwe, who was
an MP - tracked down an advocate. The three witnesses to give an
affidavit to back up - I had not in fact got an affidavit and you know -
from reporting from then on - we kind of got affidavits from the spot.

But in this case we got them after the event. And then, the next thing
that happened was - the police served a Section 205 subpoena on myself
and Tony, if I remember correctly and then charged Tony who - I don’t
want to duplicate the testimony, but he was then charged under the Police
Act for reporting my story to the BBC, I think it was Africa service.

That is about as much as I can - ja - I just want to add - oh! then there
was - oh! then I was banned from crime conference. The police wouldn’t
talk to me, I was no longer a crime reporter in their eyes. And they - I
remember it became a press issue, because they said that journalist had
to have special police accreditation at that time to be a crime reporter.
And we took up the [indistinct] on that one.

They - and the Cape - all Cape Times reporters, as best memory served,
refused to have that special police accreditation. It was a bona
contention of journalistic circles at the time. Then, they banned all the
Cape Times reporters from talking to the police. They put a blank ban on
the entire Cape Times. I can’t remember how long that stayed in place,
because we went to Newspaper Press Union. Questions were raised in
Parliament and eventually Louis Le Grange lifted it.

Ja, that - basically after reporting the story, I effectively couldn’t
operate as a crime reporter anymore. I could have, but that - you know
the daily crime conference was one of the main sources of daily news and
if you wanted to be a competitive crime reporting newspaper, that was an
important source of stories.

And just a footnote would be - I was taken aback at the [indistinct] that
my story caused, because I saw it as a straight reporting job and which I
got both sides of the story. And I think it was the context in which it
took place that turned it into something way out of proportion to the
fairly simple task I have performed, and that - ja.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Mr Bateman, we are going to have to just go back a little bit and try and
get some clarity to help us - in a sense we get to reconstruct this
scenario. You were actually physically in the hostel, you went up stairs
- you know exactly where this hostel is.

MR BATEMAN

Yes, I do.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Okay, would you mind if we showed you some aerial photographs.

MR BATEMAN

Not at all.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Of the area and could you tell us from looking at these photographs
whether these are the Dairy Belle hostels.

MR BATEMAN

Sure.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Mr Bateman, please look at photograph 29 and 30.

MR BATEMAN

Okay I see them.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Are those the Dairy Belle hostels?

MR BATEMAN

That is yes, at - at H in the top picture.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Right, if I would ask you to kindly look at the map - on your right, on
the board there.

MR BATEMAN

Okay.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Ja from the aerial photographs you have before you - are you able to
place on that map where those hostels are located? Yes the bushes - the
bushes are on top. NY1 is running down the page - on my right hand side
of the page, so it’s on the left...[intervention]

MR BATEMAN

Is NY1 running diagonally from my right to my left on the picture?

MS WILDSCHUT

That is right, yes - yes.

MR BATEMAN

Okay.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Ja.

MR BATEMAN

Okay - I am a little bit confused as to looking at the hostel, because
the way my mind has it, is where the bushes are it should be where the
hostels are.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Yes.

MR BATEMAN

If I look at it - if I compare the picture - the photograph directly.

MS WILDSCHUT

Yes the one that - if you were to imagine that that, that picture on the
board is upside down.

MR BATEMAN

Okay.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Just imagine it that to the other way around, then it would correspond
with the photographs you have. No-no don’t turn it please, please just
imagine it.

MR BATEMAN

Okay.

MS WILDSCHUT:

But just imagine that - that upside...[intervention]



MR BATEMAN

Okay then - then in fact - the hostel would be - would be in the bottom
left hand - be bottom left hand side.

MS WILDSCHUT

No, bottom right.

MR BATEMAN

Bottom left - bottom right - NY1. Okay sorry, yes - no I get it ja. I can
in fact see the other building on the left, ja okay.

MS WILDSCHUT

Okay.

MR BATEMAN

Thank you I am with you.

MS WILDSCHUT:

All right - are you able to point it out for us please.

MR BATEMAN

What, the hostel?

MS WILDSCHUT

Yes.

MR BATEMAN

Okay.

MS WILDSCHUT

That is right, thank you. Okay so if any one were to be coming down NY1
in the direction of the hostel, the person in the hostel would be able to
see very clearly what is happening in that vicinity?

MR BATEMAN

Certainly, yes.

MS WILDSCHUT

Okay right. You went into Mr Sibaca’s room at the time?

MR BATEMAN

Yes.

MS WILDSCHUT

You went into.

MR BATEMAN

Ja.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Are you able to tell us whether in fact from his window - he could see
the events happening in NY1?

MR BATEMAN

Yes, I am, it was directly above.

MS WILDSCHUT

So he - he was in the direct line of vision of what was happening in that
area there.

MR BATEMAN

Yes he was.

MS WILDSCHUT

Okay - now thank you very much for that. So we are able now to locate
where Mr General Sibaca was and where the scene was actually happening -
the crime scene - as it were.

We need to know, secondly - what time it was that you arrived and what
time it was that the blood was being washed from the street - from the
tarmac.

MR BATEMAN

I would have to reconstruct that.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Yes, okay.

MR BATEMAN

From memory - simply going back to my belated arrival at the police crime
conference - which started normally at 9.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Right.

MR BATEMAN

I...[intervention]

MS WILDSCHUT:

Take your time please.

MR BATEMAN

I - ja I kind of testified this before, but I have no memory of what the
testimony was.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Okay.

MR BATEMAN

So my best recollection would be - it would have been close to - I
imagine it would have been after half past nine.



MS WILDSCHUT

Yes, so, because you had reported at about nine o’clock at the
conference. Realized that there was nobody there, sped through to
Guguletu to be there.

MR BATEMAN

Correct ja.

MS WILDSCHUT

About what time does it take to get through to Guguletu?

MR BATEMAN

To Gugs?

MS WILDSCHUT:

From Cape Town.

MR BATEMAN

From Cape Town - 20 minutes at the outside, Probably less.

MS WILDSCHUT

Okay - all right.

MR BATEMAN

Ja.

MS WILDSCHUT:

And if you going very fast, it could be...[intervention]

MR BATEMAN

It could be a considerable amount less.

MS WILDSCHUT

Okay - you are still looking at the pictures - is there anything that
you...[intervention]

MR BATEMAN

I have just - ja.

MS WILDSCHUT

Ja - thank you very much for that.

MR BATEMAN

Okay.

MS WILDSCHUT:

You - you began to tell us a little bit about the fact this incident
created quite a [indistinct] there in the press circles and so on. Why do
you think that you were banned from coming to the press conferences, the
court team - what happened?

MR BATEMAN

I think the straight - I think the straight truth is - is that I was
considered as a security risk. I had been fine up and until then, but
this - the way that I had it, was that from - from this moment on I was
then considered a serious security risk. That was my impression, it’s my
belief.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Okay, thank you very much. I do not have any more questions to ask you.
And I’ll hand you over to the chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you very much, any further questions - Pumla.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thanks Chairperson. Thank you sir for coming here. When we first started,
before we had our first hearings in Cape Town - you assisted us to a very
great extent. The documentation that you have collection of clippings,
the collages - you have made over the years, your testimonies, and that
was a great help for us, because often people don’t know about it - or
didn’t know at the time about the work that we are doing and we had to
use a lot of the material that you gave us, to be led - to lead ourselves
to people who were involved at the time and thank you very much for your
assistance - for that .

And further than that, to perhaps ask you - a question that is not very
related to the facts as such. That what does it take a person like
yourself - the nature of our history in this country - is that of racism.
And that often there is no relationship between black and white people.

You were a journalist - you were writing on a story and I do not believe
that, that was purely professional interest. I know that you went to the
funeral and that you in fact spend a night in Gugs. And I just want you
to share with us - what is it about you - about you - you are a white
person - you did not only report on the story - something that happened
in a black township. Your life was in danger, you went there. You spent
hours there with people.

What is it that drives you to relate to people at that level? And drives
you to be so concerned about a tragedy that happened in a totally
different area? I mean, divided totally from your own existence. Not only
in terms of the geographic boundaries, but just also in terms of what
apartheid things stood for? Why is it that you do share at that level?

MR BATEMAN

I think, the short answer is an accident of birth. I grew up in a trading
store in Kwa-Zulu Natal. And my early playmates were Zulu children, and
it was ja - it was something I was, I am very grateful for and that I am
able to relate on a level which a lot of white South Africans are not.

And just a word about the TRC was - is that - this is the first hearing I
have attended and I was struck at the strength of my emotions and
listening to the mothers testify. And I just have a belief that if the
people in Constantia were to really listen to that, that it would add an
enormous amount to the reconciliation of our country.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you and I think you have tasked in a fundamentally - at least what
I consider to be a fundamental aspects of race relations in this country
- that if you don’t know people, I mean if you don’t know them as people
- then there is a difficulty in relating to them as such.

And if people begin to go back and begin a new way of relating to people.
At least we will be on the road to minimally working on reconciliation,
thank you.

MR BATEMAN

Thank you.

ADV POTGIETER:

Just one thing.

CHAIRPERSON:

Yes Denzil.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Chairperson - about how long after you had arrived on the
scene, were you interviewing these police who were involved in the
incident?



MR BATEMAN

I have a - my memory is several hours later. I can’t remember - I seem to
remember we went back to the office first. And then telephonically
established where the policeman that were involved were. And went out but
I - my best memory is - it was several hours later.

ADV POTGIETER:

And what was the impression that you formed about the version of the
police and the version that you had heard from the persons that you spoke
to in Guguletu. Did it strike you then that there - there was a mutually
destructive element about the - these two versions?

MR BATEMAN

Yes it did, and it is the best way we could - could address that - was
simply to carry both versions.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON

Thank you, we - we want to pay a very warm tribute to yourself as an
individual person, but also maybe more generally [indistinct] tribute to
those of your colleagues in the media - who were amongst the only people
who were able to tell our story.

We - we are constantly be saying to people that in - being engaged in the
struggle, it was important for us to be able to tell South Africa - but
especially to tell the world our story. And we are enormously grateful
that there were people like yourselves who did do that and when people
did hear our story, indeed - what it was about - the world supported us.
And today South Africa is free and I said in one other occasion, that the
media - to some extent can be looked upon as having been the midwives to
the process.

And we - I mean we clobber you now and again when you are nasty to us and
you don’t tell nice stories about us. You tell - you tell people about
our cars and things like that and we get a little annoyed. But seriously
- we do want to take our hats off to you. In that you - many people
actually, in other parts of the world perhaps aren’t aware of how
dangerous it was to tell the truth.

That it was a very great cause and we are enormously grateful to you and
I see to Tony Heard - maybe stand and let us salute you as well. You were
editor of this newspaper at the time and you got into trouble. We are
very grateful and we salute you as well. Thank you very much.

I will - I allow you to clap then and perhaps we should clap them.

I think we probably have earned ourselves a bit of lunch. Can you please
stand and we will resume at two o’clock, please stand.

MEETING ADJOURNS FOR LUNCH



