
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	27-06-1996	NAME:BANDLAKAZI J. BEKWA

CASE: PORT ELIZABETH

DAY 2



ACTING CHAIRMAN:	I'd like to make sure about your name. Are you
Bandlakazi because your name is reflected as Bondlakazi are you Bekwa?

MRS BEKWA:	Bekwa.

ACTING CHAIRMAN:	Bekwa. We welcome you Mama. We'd like you to take an
oath and Mr Xundu will lead you.

REV XUNDU:	We welcome you Mrs Bekwa and you and your many people, we know
that you had lost a loved one who is your son. At the time it was just
something which was not taken seriously, but you can know that it is one
of the heroes. Please stand to take an oath.

BANDLAKAZI JANE BEKWA:	(sworn states)

REV XUNDU:	Thank you very much.

ACTING CHAIRMAN:	Reverend Xundu, Mama, will lead you.

REV XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mrs Bekwa, are you married and what
is your clan name?

MRS BEKWA:	I am a Zotwa, I was Mrs Bekwa.

REV XUNDU:	The gentleman next to me is also having the same clan name
with you?

MRS BEKWA:	Lungi is my third born.

REV XUNDU:	Among your sons?

MRS BEKWA:	Four sons.

REV XUNDU:	Thank you. I'd like you to give us a brief outline about
Lundi. Please inform us what happened and why did it happen.

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	BJ BEKWA

MRS BEKWA:	I would like to expand a bit about Lundi. Lundi was attending
the school here in Port Elizabeth at the Methodist when she passed the
standard, she went to Lowiso. He wanted to go to another school and I
said he must wait and make an application. I asked him what courses would
you like to follow, he said he doesn't want to be a teacher because I
asked him if he wanted to be a teacher like me, he said he wanted to be a
lawyer.

	But he said since it is late already for this year for tertiary
education, I will have to make another application. He said he would be
doing temporary jobs and then he got a job at City Treasure and Park
Tower.

	That was the beginning of his harassment by the police. During the lunch
he would be taken by the police and they would take him to Sanlam, they
would request him to be an informer. He told me that he told them that he
would rather die rather than be an informer.

REV XUNDU:	Was he any member of any organisation?

MRS BEKWA:	I didn't understand your question, would you repeat it please?

REV XUNDU:	By this time, was he a member of any organisation?

MRS BEKWA: Yes, he was a member of the UDF.

REV XUNDU: I'd like to find out if he was a member of PEPCO?

MRS BEKWA: No, he was member of the United Democratic Front. Lundi would
say I am unable to have my lunch peacefully because the Boers would come
and take me to Sanlam and persuade me to be their informer.	As I've said
before, he used to say he would rather die.

REV XUNDU:	Did he tell you who were the people who used to take him?

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	BJ BEKWA

MRS BEKWA:	No, I do not know. He continued working there and he told me
that it happened daily. I told him that it is your choice, if you prefer
to betray your people, then you can do it, but if you feel that you will
stand for the truth, then it is also your choice.

	He said I will never betray my people. He said he will rather loose the
job because they always say they know that we are a big family, my mother
is struggling so they would like me to be part of them. I used to inform
them that I am making ends meet.

REV XUNDU:	I'd like to disturb you a bit. I'd like us to be brief Mama.
Okay, what happened?

MRS BEKWA:	Yes, I am coming to that point. They used to say they would
give him money and he used to say he won't take money which was dripping
with blood.	

	At the end of the year he received a letter which admitter him at Nqoya
University. The Boers used to come with a white kombi and always wanted
to take them along with them. He always refused to go with them.

	I made preparations for him so that he could go. He used to travel
separately by plane because I knew that the police were always looking
for him, so he never travelled by train because I was trying to protect
him.

REV XUNDU:	When did he go to the university?

MRS BEKWA:	It was in 1982. He was in the faculty of (indistinct), 1982,
it is when he was killed.

REV XUNDU:	Did he also join any organisation there?

MRS BEKWA:	I am not aware of any. The only thing that I know is that he
was a member of the UDF as I have mentioned. Maybe at school his
colleagues can state that he belonged to another one.

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	BJ BEKWA

REV XUNDU:	Can we just get more information about how did he get injured?

MRS BEKWA:	Mpomelelo Faku was the one who gave me a programme. I can give
you the programme, because that is where everything is reflected. On the
whole it is the Inkatha which killed him because Inkatha wanted to hold a
meeting there at school, but the children refused, so the quarrel started.

REV XUNDU:	What did they want to do there, why did Inkatha want to go
there?

MRS BEKWA:	I think it was the memorial of King Qetwalo.

REV XUNDU:	So were the students attacked because of their refusal to
accommodate the Inkatha?

MRS BEKWA:	Yes. Some of the children ran away. Some of the children were
attacked whilst they were going to the lectures or to the library.

REV XUNDU:	Did this happen during the night?

MRS BEKWA:	I am not quite sure because I was not there. That is why I say
I have the record and documents to that.

REV XUNDU:		How many children died?

MRS BEKWA:	About five died. Lundi was amongst them. I think the others
were from Piet Retief, the other one was from Durban, the other one was
from Bushbuckridge.

REV XUNDU:	Were you informed by the university about what happened to
your son?

MRS BEKWA:	I came to know about this when it was broadcast over the
radio. Mr Zwoka came, who is the reverend and I asked him whether he knew
anything about my son because I was shocked to see him. He confirmed that
it was my son who had been killed.

	I said I was going to Durban to see my child. Reverend PORT ELIZABETH
HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	BJ BEKWA

Zwoka said I shouldn't want to go, he said one of my children should go,
so I had a son who is Zondelelo, who was also a victim of the apartheid,
who was pushed out of the train and then he was then amputated, both his
legs were amputated.

	Zondelelo was a militant. He went to the university and he could find a
few belongings. His books were lost. REV XUNDU:	I'd like to find out
Mama, did the university authorities inform you that your son had died in
that conflict?

MRS BEKWA:	I received a letter from Incabinde, it was after Zondelelo had
already been there. He said he was sympathising and sending condolences
about my son's death.

REV XUNDU:	Was there any inquests or was a post-mortem done?

MRS BEKWA:	I wrote a letter to Incabinde, trying to find out about the
circumstances which led to my son's death. He responded by saying he was
never informed about an inquest, he advised me to write a letter to the
Magistrate, he is the one who might be able to give me details about the
arrangements of the post-mortem.

	I didn't get anything from any of the people to whom I was sent, nobody
gave my any information and why were they killed, and how were they
killed.	The only thing that I know is that it was said the Inkatha, the
police and the Defence Force from Durban was responsible for this death.

REV XUNDU:	Was Incabinde a rector at the time?

MRS BEKWA:	Yes, he was a rector at the time.	

REV XUNDU:	Who is the Chancellor presently?

MRS BEKWA:	Do you mean at that time? It is the one person who is at
KwaZulu, the one whom I hate, it is Gatsha,

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	BJ BEKWA

because he is mentioned.

REV XUNDU:	Who is this gentlemen from KwaZulu?

MRS BEKWA:	It is Buthelezi.

REVD XUNDU:	Okay. Were there any lawyers who assisted you to make some
investigations?

MRS BEKWA:	I contacted Incabinde because I wanted him to give me more
details. He did nothing else but send me from one office to another,
that's why I didn't get any information. I continued to make enquiries,
but I didn't get any information. I was surprised because I sent my son
for education, but he came back as a corpse. But I was glad because he
died in the institution in which I have sent him.

REV XUNDU:	Was there any lawyers that you went to?

MRS BEKWA:	No, the lawyer who was always handling our cases, the lawyer
Mcenge, also died and his wife also died. REV XUNDU:	The child was
brought in, was he transferred to your place?

MRS BEKWA:	Yes, he was put in a coffin which was a coffin for paupers.
All the students were there and everybody gave support. I had to go to
the shops to buy some food for the students who were filling my place
because they were coming to support me.

	They didn't even want to go anywhere because they said they wanted to
come to my place. They didn't mind that my house was very small. They
said they didn't want to go to anybody's place, but my place.

	We were assisted by the neighbours for everything which was required at
the time.

REV XUNDU:	I have another question for you Mama. What would you like the
Commission to do if it was capable?

MRS BEKWA:	I know Lundi was going to be a breadwinner,

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7	BJ BEKWA

because before he left he said to me, Mama, as I can see that you are
struggling so that I can be educated, I will take over when I finish
school. Your grandchildren will never struggle and all my relatives will
not struggle, because I will try my best so that they can continue their
education.

	And he was prepared to build me a house because he was very proud of
himself, he was certain that he was going to a successful lawyer, he
stated that wherever I would go, I would never suffer. I will give you
monthly support, financial support of R5 000-00.

REV XUNDU:	Mama, what would you like the Commission to do? What is your
wish?

MRS BEKWA:	I cannot hear properly.

REV XUNDU:	What is your wish?

MRS BEKWA:	I'd like the Commission to make investigations about what
happened at the university. There are many students who state that they
were there. Mr Brian Dlebe was supposed to be here, he had promised to
come and give support and add some information.

	Unfortunately his father has died so he has to make funeral arrangements
for him. Xolisle Nana is the other one who is prepared to give evidence,
because they were his friends, they know what happened. There are some
girls who were also prepared to come.

	I'd like you to make contact with those people, they might give you more
information because I was not there, but most of the information they
might be having, I can also give you some facts that I documented, so
that you can go on with your investigations.

REV XUNDU:	Were there any problems during the funeral?

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8	BJ BEKWA

MRS BEKWA:	Yes, the police would come and hit the people, trying to
disperse them from the funeral. They wanted to take the corpse. There was
a huge crowd of people which was dispersed by the police, I think it is
because my son was the first student to be killed by the police, it was
such a huge crowd which attended the funeral.

	Many of them wanted to make a speech because Lundi was popular amongst
them and he was also a comrade.

REV XUNDU:	Was Xolisle Jack the Xolisle that you're talking about?

MRS BEKWA:	Yes, the Xolisle that I say he was also a friend to my son, is
Xolisle Jack.

REV XUNDU:	Would you like to say anything more than what you've said?

MRS BEKWA:	As Lundi died in October, he was about to get married in
December. As he was about to get married, I had already bought a car so
that when he, after the marriage they should go to their honeymoon.

	Nunkeleko died, she was the fiance. She also died. They were buried
together.

REV XUNDU:	Thank you very much. I will hand over to the Chairperson,
maybe some of the Commissioners would like to ask you some questions.

ACTING CHAIRMAN:	Thank you Reverend Xundu. Any questions? Revd Finca?

MR FINCA:	Thank you very much Mr Chairperson. I would like to ask a few
questions to the witness. I'd like to know the role of the university of
Mqoya. I think there are some issues that it might have handled, so we'd
like to know whether they had any responsibility that they had taken when
your son died. I want to find out did I get it right when

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9	BJ BEKWA

your son died, you read this, it was on papers and the university never
informed you because we believe the institution was supposed to have
informed you about his death.

MRS BEKWA:	Nobody informed me. Revd Zonka is the person who came to me.
Incabinde who is the rector of the university at the time, he wrote me a
letter later on after my son had already been there, the one who was
surviving the deceased.

MR FINCA:	When you went to fetch your son, did the university provide any
transport so that your son should be brought along in a dignified manner?

MRS BEKWA:	He was brought along in the kombi of the university. I
requested the person to go because I was trying to protect him, because I
was afraid that the children or the youth would be angry and could come
and assault the person who is driving the ...

MR FINCA:	(tape starts) ... give a speech so that you can get information
about the death of your child?

MRS BEKWA:	No, nothing of the sort did happen. The only thing that
happened is during the memorial service, Mpomelelo Faku was the one who
was addressing people, informing them about what happened, that is where
I got the information.

MR FINCA:	Was there any inquest made by the university with regard to
your son's death, did they inform you or contact you to state what
happened?

MR BEKWA:	No, nothing. I believe that they were happy about the incident.
I repeat, I'd like the investigations to be made so that this should
never happen again. It is painful to send your child for tertiary
education and then he comes

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	10	BJ BEKWA

back as a corpse. They used to say he is a Xhosa and they would be
harassed by the other students. But they used to continue studying
although they were having racism amongst themselves. The Sotho's, the
Zulu's and the Xhosa's. I was surprised why could they accommodate other
racial groups, yet they knew that they wanted only the Zulu's to be in
that university.

	I am having a problem because my children have not been educated,
because my son was prepared to take over from me. I have this child who
was thrown from the train, the window of a train and his legs were
amputated.

	Lundi was prepared to support my children and the whole family.

ACTING CHAIRMAN:	We would like to thank you Mama Bekwa for your evidence.
We all share your pain as the South Africans, it was very painful to hear
what happened at the university when those five children died at the
University of Zululand.

	It was suspected that they were killed by the Inkatha group members and
they were killed during the day when there was an occasion. A day which
was supposed to have been regarded as the day to rejoice as it was the
graduation ceremony for those who have succeeded.

	Unfortunately the university turned into a battlefield as the students
were attacked by the armed group of people when they were unarmed. He is
not the only one, Professor Marupati who is University of South Africa,
has also a story to tell because his son died during that incident.

	He is now stationed there at Pretoria, I can remember him as one of the
people who suffered also in the same way as you have suffered.

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	11	

	We have a branch of the Commission, I am certain that the investigators
and the people who are researchers will try to communicate with those who
are in Natal and give them Lundi's name so that we can get clarity of
what really happened that day.

	We will try to consider your request, I would not say we will meet your
son's wishes and needs, especially for - the promise to support you
financially and give you R5 000-00 a month, I am certain that you
understand that you are not the only one and there are so many people,
because we are going all over the country and there might be more wishes.

	At times we should like it when the people realise it that some of their
needs and demands may not be met.

MRS BEKWA:	I'd like to find out if that incident cannot be televised,
because I have never seen what happened. That is my request. Maybe when I
see on TV and watch it, there might be some people whom you could
identify who would be on the TV.

CHAIRMAN:	As I've said before Mama, we will try to make contact with some
of the journalists, there might be some footages of the incident, maybe
they could assist us. Probably you'd be able to get some assistance in
that regard.

	Thank you.

	--------------------

