
	1	V BELESI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 28.08.96			NAME: VUYISWA VIRGINIA BELESI

CASE: - UITENHAGE

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, I now ask Vuyiswa Virginia Belesi as the next
witness.

VUYISWA VIRGINIA BELESI: (sworn states)

PANEL MEMBER: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Good morning Ms Belesi. Can you
hear me over the head phones?

MS BELESI: Yes.

PANEL MEMBER: Good. Welcome here. Your story relates to the death of your
son, Phumzile Gladwell Belesi, during 1989, another victim of the
conflict that we are hearing about today. Would you like to tell us what
happened?

MS BELESI: I was sleeping and it was in the morning, then there was a
knock at the door and some commotion and noise, then I stood up to open
the door and young men and boys asked for Phumzile and I knew the one
that was asking, his name is Dugisowasi, then I directed him to the front
room and they talked to him and I don't know what they were talking
about. Then they said that he should wake up and join them and Phumzile
washed his face and got into the house and took a small kerrie.

	That was the last I saw of him and there was commotion during the day
and they did not come back and we could see some ambulances moving up and
down and the day went on and he wasn't coming. Then I panicked and I
decided to sent his girlfriend to go to hospital, to go and look for him.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	V BELESI

Phumbla and Notando went to hospital and when they got back, they said
that they did not see Phumzile, but then there was a rumour that there
were some that were in Livingstone in Port Elizabeth, so the following
day I went to Livingstone hospital and they said that there was no such
person there, but I looked for him for a long time and then I gave up and
went back home. When I got home, the wife Tumpeli, he called me and said
to me that he had heard that Phumzile had died on that very day and so he
opted to accompany me to go to Kay Street to look for him.

	So I was accompanied by another woman from no.24, this is a woman I used
to help, so she accompanied me to Kay Street and I described him
according to his attire but I was scared to get in, so the woman who was
with me went inside and she saw him and so that is how I got his body.

PANEL MEMBER: Can I just ask you some questions just to try and clarify
what actually happened. Was it on the 28 December 1989 when the group of
youths came and called Phumzile with them?

MS BELESI: Yes, that is right.

PANEL MEMBER: Was that at your house at No.9 Hinsel Road in Kwanubushle?

MS BELESI: You mean to come and get him. Yes, they knocked at my house
and they asked for Phumzile.

PANEL MEMBER: Now, what was Phumzile doing, was he working or was he at
school?

MS BELESI: He was working at BA, together with his father.

PANEL MEMBER: Can you give us an idea of what his age was?

MS BELESI: He was born in 1968, on the 9 September.

PANEL MEMBER: Did he have any children?

MS BELESI: Yes, he had one child, but when he died, the

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	V BELESI

mother was still pregnant and this child is living with me at the moment.

PANEL MEMBER: Has he got two children?

MS BELESI: No, he was got one child.

PANEL MEMBER: You say that the mother of the child was pregnant when
Phumzile was killed?

MS BELESI: Yes, that is right.

PANEL MEMBER: ...that child now.

MS BELESI: It is me because I am bringing this child up and the child
stays with me, the mother left the child when he was 3 months old.

PANEL MEMBER: Did you find out how Phumzile was actually killed?

MS BELESI: From what I hear is that teargas was administered and they
were chased by caspers and he was hit dead by a hippo.

PANEL MEMBER: Was there ever any court case or an inquest concerning the
death?

MS BELESI: No, we never went to any court.

PANEL MEMBER: Were you told officially who was responsible for the death,
or officially told what happened?

MS BELESI: No.

PANEL MEMBER: Is there anything that you would like to draw our attention
to in particular, or that you want us to attend to?

MS BELESI: I've got none.

PANEL MEMBER: Don't you have difficulty in maintaining the child yourself?

MS BELESI: I have difficulty because he attends school but I have a wish
that I could get assistance towards his upbringing and towards his
education because he happens to

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	V BELESI

be the only child, whilst Phumzile on the other hand was the only child.

PANEL MEMBER: If Phumzile was run over by a police vehicle, then one
assumes that there must be some official record of that, would you wish
the Commission to look into that issue and find out what has actually
happened there.

MS BELESI: Yes, that is my wish only if it is not going to hurt me more.

PANEL MEMBER: We thank you for coming and we thank you for giving
evidence and telling us what happened to Phumzile, I will now hand over
to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Are there any other questions. Thank you, could you again
take your seat.

---------------------



