
	1	K BHANA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: KHYALETU PATRICK BHANA

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________CHAIRPERSON: We
are going to call upon our last witness who will then be the last, so
that we can be able to go to the scene of the incident as said earlier on
by the Commissioner. Let me firstly affirm your full names, Mr Bhana,
because we did not have the opportunity to receive a statement from you
whereby you would give full explanation about yourself. What are your
full names?

KHYALETU PATRICK BHANA: (sworn states)

MR BHANA: My full names are Khyaletu Patrick Bhana.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you one of the people who was affected by the shooting
there on that day in question on the 21 March?

MR BHANA: Yes, I was greatly affected by this attack of the 21 March 1985.

CHAIRPERSON: Could I ask that you should briefly explain, where you were
at the time the people were going for the funeral.

MR BHANA: I would say I was in the third row and I was in front. We were
holding hands as comrades and we were advancing.

CHAIRPERSON: At what stage were you shot, Mr Bhana?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	K BHANA

MR BHANA: Mr Chairperson, at the time they were starting to shoot, I
stopped holding hands and I ran facing the 15th Avenue and I went up
running very fast and before I had intentions to get into one of the
houses but unfortunately, one of the houses was closed and there were
people dressed in green clothes.

CHAIRPERSON: At the time they were hitting you with the bullet, had you
already ran away from the scene of the shooting?

MR BHANA: Yes, I had, because I felt if they had shot me I would have
fallen there.

CHAIRPERSON: Did they actually hit you?

MR BHANA: Yes, they did. Whilst I was running away.

CHAIRPERSON: Where did they shoot you?

MR BHANA: They shot me at the back.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you the one who said you got into a nearby yard where
the shooting was taking place?

MR BHANA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Then what happened were you were in that yard?

MR BHANA: What happened is that I was not far from the scene of the
incident and I was in the yard, and as I was getting into a certain house
these people tried to lock me out and whilst I was getting to the bedroom
I heard some gun shots.

CHAIRPERSON: Now tell us where did they actually hit you?

MR BHANA: They hit me at the back.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you get any help from hospital?

MR BHANA: Yes, I was treated in one hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: What hospital was that? Is it the same hospital where all
these victims were being sent to?

MR BHANA: Yes, that was in Livingstone Hospital.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	K BHANA

CHAIRPERSON: Who took you there?

MR BHANA: I was taken from this house to Church Street, and then I was
taken to provincial hospital and I was driven in an ambulance to
Livingstone Hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell us about the injuries that you sustained as
reported by the doctor.

MR BHANA: The doctor did not give me any explanation pertaining to the
injuries.

CHAIRPERSON: Are there any pains that you still feel today as a result of
the shooting, or do you still have some treatment you get from the doctor?

MR BHANA: There is no treatment that I get from doctors and I really feel
a lot of pain because I had eight bullet wounds and some other times when
it is overcast, my body becomes painful.

CHAIRPERSON: At the time people were called to Jubilee Hotel, were you
one of the people?

MR BHANA: Yes, I did go there.

CHAIRPERSON: And then what happened?

MR BHANA: I got some assistance there.

CHAIRPERSON: Now, what kind of assistance?

MR BHANA: I mean financial assistance.

CHAIRPERSON: Now, are you ready to tell us how much you actually received
there?

MR BHANA: I received R8 000 at the Jubilee Hotel.

CHAIRPERSON: Was there a lawyer assisting you to get this money?

MR BHANA: Yes, I got this money because a lawyer assisted me to get it.
My lawyer was Molly Blackpan.

CHAIRPERSON: By being here now as we are concluding, what is your
requests to this Commission?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	K BHANA

MR BHANA: My request is that this Commission should bring forward
Lieutenant Fouche to come and give an account of the blood and the
killing that he administered on this particular day.

CHAIRPERSON: Is that all you have to say?

MR BHANA: I have got a lot of things to say, but we are now trying to
summarise otherwise I would be saying more and really there is just no
time.

CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything that's new?

MR BHANA: Yes, there is. At the time I was in this bedroom, where these
policemen took me out, the policemen pushed in a firearm through the
window and I pleaded, asking that people should open the door and they
did. This I mentioned in my statement. Then one Afrikaner said, yes, you
red trouser, you are making a struggle, so I am trying to say that these
Boers, they mark us so that is as far as I can go.

CHAIRPERSON: We must thank you for your explanation and your evidence Mr
Bhana.

----------------------

