	PROCEEDINGS HELD AT




	PROCEEDINGS HELD AT

	BLOEMFONTEIN

	DAY 2

	[PAGES 1 - 134]



	Index

	I N D E X

NO	ITEM	PAGE N°

1.	Mr Tshabalala.......................................................	1
- 7

2.	Betty Laliwe Lowape..............................................	8 -
15

3.	Morgan Sabatha Phehlani........................................	16 - 34

4.	Pumla Marina Mashoang.........................................	34 - 43

5.	Bhaki George Morake.............................................	44 -
52

6.	Mrs G S Daseko....................................................	53
- 60

7.	Modisi Elias Moyhilwa............................................	61 -
68

8.	Mamarama Tshale..................................................	69 -
74

9.	Mr
Pistsol............................................................	75 -
83

10.	Shuping Josiah Motlale............................................	84
- 91

11.	Mr E
Molatseli.....................................................	92 - 102

12.	Shadrack Rataba and Jonas Molehe............................	103 - 114

13.	Mr B
Bolane........................................................	115 - 134

	---oOo---

DR BORAINE: Good Morning, Mr Tshabalala. I gather that you can hear me
all right? Can you just switch on the microphone please? Thank you. You
can hear me all right?

MR TSHABALALA: I can hear you quite well.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Mr Tshabalala, you have brought somebody
with you. Could you please tell me who that is?

MR TSHABALALA: This is my mother, Emily Charles.

DR BORAINE: I'd like to welcome you, Mrs Tshabalala, very much. We are
glad that you have joined your son whilst he is talking to us. Mr
Tshabalala, you're going to tell us about a cousin, Edward Viyu Charles,
who was killed, and even though it's not a brother or a sister, a father
or a mother, it's a part of you, a part of your family, and we know that
you feel this deeply, and we are very glad that you've come to tell this
story about your cousin. Now, I have to ask you please to stand to take
the oath.

	---------------------

MR TSHABALALA (Sworn, States)

DR BORAINE: Please be seated Mr Tshabalala. Mr Tshabalala, you are first
today. I am not sure if you were here yesterday, but we always ask a
member of the panel, one of my colleagues, to assist whoever is giving
their story, and on this occasion, to assist you wherever you may need
it, is Mr Ilan Lax, and he is sitting on my far left, and he will take
over from me now. Thank you.

MR LAX: Good morning, Mr Tshabalala, welcome. --- Thank you very much.

(Inaudible) ... we start this morning, and before you go into the story
of the sad death of Edward Viyu

	/Charles,

Charles, could you tell us a little bit about the Charles

family, how many children there were, and so on? --- The family of
Charles is comprised of six children.

(Inaudible) ... them. --- The family of Charles is a cousin who grew up
at my father's place.

Would you now tell us what you know of the death of Edward Viyu Charles
please. --- My cousin was a student at that time. He looked very
brilliant, he had a very bright future. My cousin could see the problems
that we were going through at our home. He could also see the problems
that the black nation had. Then he took a decision that amongst all other
things he will work for his nation, especially strive for freedom. In
other words he got involved in politics. At that time when the UDF
started he was the chairperson of the UDF in Welkom. In 1983 Edward Viyu
Charles was arrested for the very first time. His second arrest was in
1985, near Welkom and Odendaalsrus, on the way to Kroonstad. In 1985 it
was a little bit difficult during those times. His life was a little bit
more in shambles, and he spent most of his time in prison, and he related
how difficult it was there. He even told us about the torture that went
on in the prison. At that time he was in Mpohadi College, and his parents
wished that he should finish is education. There were people who kept on
harassing him. Those were the law people. They were using constant death
threats, and they threatened that they would wipe the whole family out.
And there came a time where he was told that he would go because he did
not want to leave the cause for freedom. He used to talk with us to make
us aware as to all that the previous regime was not protecting his
nation. He

	/took an

took an oath and he told himself that he will continue

with the struggle, he won't turn back. Amongst the tortures that he went
through the most painful was when he was taken into a bath, put inside
the water, and he was electrocuted. In 1985 he went to Lesotho. At that
time we heard that they were threatening they would wipe the whole family
if we kept him in the family. At that time he stayed in Lesotho until he
crossed ... (incomplete)

When you're ready we can continue. (Pause) --- It was very difficult
because the parents were expecting that he should finish his education,
but he did explain to them and they did understand he had to leave the
country. It was then that we actually resolved and told ourselves that it
was the last time we saw him.

You can take your time. We don't mind waiting for you. (Pause) --- The
last time we heard him talk was when he phoned us and he told us that he
was on his way to Lusaka. That was the last time. He went to Lusaka.
Throughout we were dreaming we were also expecting him, we were also - we
also encouraged ourselves. We told ourselves that whatever decision he
had taken we were in line with it. We were being supportive because he
always explained to us the problems that he was going through. He went to
Lusaka. We heard rumours that he was around, but we never saw him. In
1987, on the 16th if I am not mistaken, that is the 16th of December, we
heard rumours that there was a terrorist who died in the vicinity of
Brandfort and Bloemfontein in a farm. He was termed a terrorist. We never
thought it could possibly he him. It took us a very long time to know
that it was him. This was being hidden away from us. I think it was in
1990

	/when myself

when myself and his elder brother we made some

investigations. We heard rumours that amongst the people who died Edward
Viyu Charles was amongst them. We made some investigations and we
discovered that he is the person who was killed in 1987. We were not
notified about his death, we only heard it from people. It looks as if
there were some people who were with him, but one of them is in
Bloemfontein according to rumour, the one who was with him at that time
when he died. The other one survived and he surrendered, but my brother
was killed by the boers. They killed him in a very painful manner.
Amongst all other things when he was being buried he was buried by the
police. I believe they just buried him like a dog or a puppy. They were
just seeing a corpse, an unknown corpse. There were two policemen who
couldn't - who had a problem burying him. This was a very painful
experience. The most cruel of them all was that when we last saw him he
was fine and alive in flesh, but now when we had to see him for the last
time he was only bones. We buried his bones in 1991. We were not burying
him in person. That's all I can say.

Thank you, Mr Charles. Just for the record could you confirm Edward Viyu
Charles' date of birth as 20 October 1964? --- It is so.

So at the time he left the country he would have been 21. --- It is so.

Now, you spoke about some inquiries that you made. Could you briefly tell
us what sort of inquiries you made to discover that the ... (inaudible)
... you subsequently reburied was in fact Edward Charles? --- His elder
brother is a teacher at Ladybrand. He heard that there

	/was somebody

was somebody who had died. He went to Bloemfontein to

come and see if there was anything he could find about his brother. He
got information that he was the one who was killed in Brandfort. We went
to Brandfort. We could not get any information as to what happened.
Thereafter we discovered that according to rumours a certain person was
being buried in a certain grave by the Comrades. It could be possible
that it was him. Further investigations that were made in Bloemfontein
confirmed that in reality the grave was his.

Thank you. Now, you spoke to us about a witness, one of the comrades of
your cousin as someone who survived that incident, and you said that that
person was somewhere in Bloemfontein. Do you know that person's name so
we can maybe try and trace him? --- I think they talked about Mohapi.
That is the name that I remember.

The elder brother who is a teacher from Ladybrand, what's his name
please? --- It's Ezekiel Themba Charles.

Thank you. You spoke of arrests during 1983 and 1985. Were those arrests
for specific charges, or specific activities that you're aware of? ---
Those accusations we are not clear as to what they entailed, but at that
time they were electing a councillor in Thabong. That was the second
arrest.

Now, from the statement that we have it seems clear that there was no
death certificate by the family as a result of this death. Can you
confirm that? --- It's difficult that we don't agree with it, because we
never saw him, we just accepted what we were being told. That's what made
us agree and resolve it is so.

So, if I understand you correctly, you're saying

	/there's

there's some doubt in your hearts that this is in fact the right person.
--- We do agree according to the knowledge that we were given, or the
information. Because they were bones we couldn't identify him, so there's
nothing that really encourages us to agree that it was really him.

(Inaudible) ... must be some doubt in your hearts. Let me just check with
you. According to the statement, and you can confirm this for me please,
you were never called to any cases or inquests of any kind that you know
of? --- We were never called to any inquests or any courts of law.

Okay. We will do our best to try and track down the official records if
they're still around, and to see whether we can help you clear up this
confusion for you. With that I hand back to the Chairperson.

	---------------------

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Any other comments, questions? Can I
just make absolutely sure that I understand you? You mentioned that your
cousin was exhumed. Now, where was the burial site before you moved him
for the second burial? Where was that? --- He was buried at Brandfort.

(Inaudible) ... that in the local cemetery, or where was that? --- It was
there at the local cemetery.

We are grateful to you for coming and for telling us your story. We have
made a number of notes so that we can follow this up, and Mr Lax has told
you already that as much information that we can get as possible is
important so that we can try to assist you to find out more details of
what happened, who killed him, who buried him, and

	/whether

whether it really was your cousin. We'll do our very best to help in
every way, and we just want to thank you and we want to thank your mother
for coming here today. Thank you very much.

	---------------------

DR BORAINE: Mrs Lowape, can you hear me through the headphones?

MRS LOWAPE: Yes, I can hear you perfectly well.

DR BORAINE: Mrs Lowape, we welcome you very warmly to this second day of
the hearings. We are very grateful that you have taken the trouble to
come and share with us, and share with the nation, your own pain and
suffering. You are going to tell us about the shooting of your son,
Papiki, and before you do that you have to be under oath, so I'll ask you
to please stand.

	---------------------

BETTY LALIWE LOWAPE (Sworn, States)

DR BORAINE: Thank you, Mrs Lowape, will you please take your seat again,
and my colleague Mrs Gcabashe is now going to take over from me.

MRS GCABASHE: Let me start by thanking you. Are you coming from Welkom?
Thank you for coming here to give us evidence to help us, all of us, so
that all the people can know the truth of what happened in the past. I
sympathise with you as you have lost your son. We have your statement
here. I would request you to start. You give us the details about your
family background. Can you hear me? --- I have 10 children. He was the
sixth one.

Are you working? --- No, I am not working at the moment.

Are you working? --- My husband is sick, he is not working.

Is Papiki your son? Can you tell me the date of birth and his age during
this accident? Can you give me the birth details? --- He was only 16
years old when he died. He was only 16 years old.

	/In your

In your statement here you said Papiki was shot by the police in 1984. Is
it like that? --- Yes, it is so.

Can you briefly tell us what happened until - that led to his death? ---
He was coming from the hospital. He was under medication. He was
paralysed. He was under hospital medication. Can you tell us everything
that happened on that particular day? I want to get all the details from
you. --- On that particular day, 17th of August, he was coming from the
hospital. On the way home he met the police. The police were spreading
tear gas and they were shooting children. He was shot on the way home.
Though he was walking with crutches he was shot, because he was
paralysed. I think they shot him round about one, because I was fetched
by my children when he was already shot. That was a boy and a girl. They
told me that their brother had been shot by the police and he had fallen
there, they can't wake him up. I was given permission from work to go
back. I went to where he was shot. I found him sprawled on the floor.

You can take your time. --- I found him sprawled. The artificial limb had
fallen out. I asked what had happened because he was just coming from the
hospital, and now his medication had fallen also. I asked what sort of a
policeman could do that. A white policeman came, as well as a black
policeman. They told me that it's a long time, this is long overdue, that
we should have collected our children, they must stop moving around the
street. I told them that my child wasn't in the street but he was on his
way back from the hospital. They had shot him in the stomach, as well as
on the shoulder.

	/They also

They also stabbed him on the tummy. He stayed there for the whole day.
They took him round about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. At the time when
they took him they said I will get my child at the police station
mortuary. We went there the following day. When they had taken him from
the ground I went to the funeral parlour, but I turned on my way there, I
went to look as to whether there wasn't any blood there. I got a white
man there who was looking there. I asked him what he was looking for
there. I asked him whether he was looking for the bullets with which he
had shot him. Then he was startled, then he stood up. At that time I left
him and I went away. When I tried to get to where my son was they said to
me I mustn't get in there. They told me that I'll get him at the police
mortuary. The following day I went there. We took him and we buried him.
Ever since then we have never heard anything about his case, but the
police were harassing us. They were also harassing my husband at work.
That's where it ended.

We thank you. There are certain questions that we would like to pose to
you so that we can get some clarity. In your statement you talked about
your two children who came to you and told you about what had happened
after you had left. What were their names? --- It was Enette Rapi as well
Ephraim Lowape.

In your statement you referred to your son who had only one leg. --- Yes,
the other one had an artificial limb because he did not have a leg.

Can you please explain to us why he found himself without a leg? --- His
foot was a little bit paralysed on the ankle, so when he went to be
amputated he came back

	/like that.

like that. Each and every thing was just controlling itself. He had no
control over himself.

Was he born with the foot like that? --- Yes, he was born with the foot
like that. Then he went to the hospital to get this foot fixed. Then he
came back condemned. Everything in him was condemned. They amputated his
foot below his knee - his leg below his knee.

Which hospital was doing this? --- It was in Welkom Hospital.

Which year? Which year? Do you still remember? --- I don't remember quite
well because he underwent the operation when he was still very young.

INTERPRETER: The speaker's mike is not on.

MRS GCABASHE: You said on that particular day the police were pouring
tear gas over people. Can you please explain what was happening? Was
there a boycott, a strike, or an uprising? --- It was when the students
at Tito started fighting.

It was students? --- Yes, it was Tito students.

In your statement you said the police who shot your son you can actually
identify them even if you don't know their names. --- I said I could not
identify them because they were white policemen.

The one who went back, who survived, who came to look - who came to
inspect the site of death, is it possible for you to identify him? ---
No, I cannot identify him because he was actually looking down. I
couldn't see him properly.

After your son's death did you get any letter that told you as to how he
died? --- No, I never got

	/anything.

anything.

Were there any court appearances or inquiries or an inquest? --- There
was nothing, absolutely nothing.

In your statement you said your son was getting R100,00 a month. What was
that for? --- He wasn't getting anything. I wasn't getting anything.

In your statement that's where you speak about R100,00. You were not
getting any money? --- No, I wasn't getting any.

As you are on pension how much are you getting for your pension? --- I
get R410,00. R410,00.

What about your other children, are they still at school or are they
working? --- The elder ones are working. Only two are attending school. I
am educating them.

We know that we can't really help you besides tell you that we sympathise
with you, because it is apparent that your son was quite an ordinary
child, and he was very sickly. In your statement you said he was from the
hospital to take his medication. Who was examining him or who was
treating him? --- He used to fetch his medication from the hospital.

Do you have any documents or cards to indicate? --- I never went to the
hospital to look for them.

Is it possible for you to get them? --- I don't know whether it's
possible. The records should be there. 	Even though we don't have much
that we can do, but we would like to know if in your mind what would you
like us to help you with? --- I really don't know. I can't say what I
want the Commission to do.

What happened to his clothes? Did you get them

	/thereafter?

thereafter? --- Yes, I got the clothes.

What did they look like? --- They had a lot of holes, but it seems he
didn't bleed. There were holes on his shoulder as well as the tummy. He
bled internally.

Were the other children involved in the student organisation? --- No,
they weren't.

Thank you very much, Mrs Lowape. We sympathise with you very much. We
shall try to hand over to our Chairman. Thank you for having the courage
to come and tell us what happened to your son. If there's any help that
we can offer we shall try by all means to find out who did this. The
Commission will help you in that manner.

	---------------------

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Any other questions or comments? Dr
Magwaza.

DR MAGWAZA: We are aware that this is a very difficult time for you. I
have one more question just to clarify. Was your son involved in any
political movement? Did he go to any gatherings for any political party?
--- He wasn't involved with any political organisations.

The second thing, I am concerned about you and your family. How did this
affect you, how did it change your life and that of your family, the
death of your son? --- It was a very painful thing because we all loved
him. We had accepted what God had given us.

Okay, thank you.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Mrs Lowape, do you know whether anyone else was killed on that
day along with your son? --- No, he was the only one who was killed on
that particular day. It's only after a few months that other children
started

	/dying.

dying.

In your statement it is written that there was an inquest that was held
after your son's death. Now, do you recall that there was any court case?
--- There's absolutely that happened. Nothing happened.

What address were you living at at that time, Mrs Lowape? --- I was
staying at 251 in Thabong.

What is the nearest Magistrate's Court to Thabong? --- There is a police
station in Thabong.

(Inaudible) ... big town to Thabong? Is it Welkom, Bloemfontein. --- It's
Bloemfontein.

Okay. Well, we will make inquiries at the Magistrate's Court in
Bloemfontein to see whether there are any documents relating to an
inquest. Did the shooting take place in Thabong township? Is that where
you were living at the time that your son was killed? --- Yes, I was
staying in Thabong at that time.

	---------------------

MRS GCABASHE: Can I make a correction?

DR BORAINE: Yes, please, Mrs Gcabashe.

MRS GCABASHE: Thabong is a township of Welkom. It's just like
Bloemfontein and Butsabelo.

DR BORAINE: Mrs Lowape, we have listened very carefully to your story. In
the case of someone dying through shooting there's usually an inquiry
made by the police, even though it was the police who shot him, and why
we were asking exactly where were you living is because we want to try
and find out if there are any court records or any details of what
happened on that 17th of August in 1984. It sounds as though it may be
that they were firing and your son was an innocent victim walking past,
like so

	/many other

many other people who have died in cross-fire in our country. But we
don't know, so we have to try and find out. If we are able to find out we
will then come and tell you, so that at least you know exactly what
happened. Because if they were responsible then they should accept that
responsibility publicly, and also there should be some proceedings. We
will try and do our best.

But to have 16-year-old son who already not strong, with one leg, and to
have him killed so brutally, is much pain, and we feel for you very
deeply, and we are so grateful that you have come to tell us. We hope
that even in the telling of the story, in the sharing, some of the burden
will leave you, and at least you will know that the Commission appointed
by the President and the nation knows what happened to your son. Thank
you very much for coming.

	---------------------

DR BORAINE: (Inaudible) ... you can hear me clearly?

MR PHEHLANI: Yes, I can hear you very clear.

DR BORAINE: That's very good. I can hear you as well, so we're now ready
to start. We want to welcome you very warmly on behalf of the Commission,
and we are grateful to you for taking the trouble to come and sharing
with us what sounds, from your statement, to be a very, very grim and
horrifying experience with the death of your wife, severe assault against
your son, destruction of property. This was a very, very, awful, awful
experience, and we are going to listen to you very carefully. Before you
start though would you please stand for the taking of the oath?

MR PHEHLANI: I don't need an interpreter.

DR BORAINE: Okay.

	---------------------

MORGAN SABATHA PHEHLANI (Sworn, States)

DR BORAINE: Would you prefer to give your evidence in English as well, or
in Sotho, or which language? --- I will give my evidence in English, Mr
Chairman.

Thank you very much indeed. Well, without any further ado I am going to
ask Mr Lyster if he will take over from me, and put some questions to you
and help you to tell this horrifying story. Thank you. --- Thank you, Mr
Chairman.

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mr Phehlani. Now, the incidents which you have
highlighted in your statement took place in July 1991. --- That is
correct.

But before you tell us about those incidents can you very briefly give us
some background about yourself. I understand that you were involved in
political activities much earlier than that. So, without going into too
much

	/detail

detail just give us some background as to your activities. --- Mr
Chairman, I'll just give a short history. I joined the South African
Communist Party in 1939 when I was still a scholar, and I stayed in
Johannesburg in '39. I made about six months there in Johannesburg there.
I was staying with Ruth First and Joe Slovo. I was staying with them in
Johannesburg because I was a member of the Young Communist League by that
time. And then ... (intervention)

Excuse me. I am sorry to interrupt you. Could you pull the microphone a
little closer, because everybody wants to hear. --- Oh, I see.

Thank you very much. --- And then after that I decided to join the main
party itself, the Communist Party, so I was briefed to be the organiser
of the Communist Party in the Free State here. And then it's that time I
joined with Bram Fischer, and then the others, all the leaders of the
Communist Party, Moses Gutane and the others, Sam Khan and so forth and
so forth. And then I came in the Free State then, organising the
Communist Party, and after some years again I went to Johannesburg, came
back again to the Free State as an organiser on the Communist Party in
the Free State here. And then I decided to join the Advisory Board by
that time, because I thought that they are getting these things right.
Once you'll get into these organisations - our townships were so bad
streets, no water, no houses, all such things. Well, I was a member of
the Advisory Board for about a year, and then I again was chased out of
Brandfort, you know, under the pass laws, that I was not working, just a
loafer in the township here, and intimidating people to be

	/against

against the Council and so forth, and just like that. Then I was sent
back again to Johannesburg, where I came from, because they said I was a
loafer. So there's a word in Afrikaans that, "Ons gooi op jou oor die
luin" - "You must get out of this area because you are a loafer." And
then again I came back in the Free State, I started again organising
trade unions and so forth and so forth. I started organising the
Brandfort Workers Union. I found that people were just working there, you
know, for nuts, and it was necessary to organise them into a trade union
there. I started to form what they call the Brandfort Workers Union.
Well, I went on just like that until comes right again. Just not - to be
very short, in 1989 - no, let's say 1976, when these young kids started
to be against the Afrikaans. In Brandfort we had what they called the
Khosas, the students formed themselves into a group, and then it was
called the Khosas. Then these Khosas were, you know, fighting each other
in the black townships. The others did not like the Khosas, and then the
police have to intervene just like that. And then they started to have
what they called the anti-Comrades. They were fighting now, the
schoolchildren, by that time. We had a group of about 15 children who
were against the scholars, fighting the scholars. And then it's where
again the clash started again with my wife. She was in there. I couldn't
get too much in the whole thing because I was restricted and banned and
house arrested, because I was being restricted and banned from 1946, when
I was in Johannesburg. And 1950, when these organisations were banned I
was also banned and house arrested and restricted not to go to the
churches, and it was just like that. And

then it happened that Winnie Mandela encouraged us again that we should
join with these Advisory Boards, the so-called town councillors. And then
we started to join up with the Town Council. My wife went in there as a
councillor. I couldn't get in there because I was on the banned list, I
was restricted not to attend those things. And then she was there for
about two, three years as a councillor, and then they, the people of
Brandfort, they encouraged us that we should get in there because they
know what kind of people we were. Well, we tried to get them houses, to
put everything in order, so they were very much pleased with us. And then
at a later stage again they said I should also join with my wife there,
you know, to fight for our local rights in our black area there. So I got
in there too. Well, we got fightings with the local authorities in
Brandfort, fightings with the Provincial Councils, to get sites for us
there. Well, I managed to get about three locations at Brandfort there
through my efforts and my wife. So then in 1989 those small kids, or
those young boys were fighting the scholars, the so-called Khosas. Then
those anti-Comrades, they started to join with the ANC in Brandfort, and
then they started to call me that I am a communist, I am a sell-out, all
such things, because before they did not like me, because the white guys
were telling these youngsters and Brandfort people that, "You must hate
this Phehlani ... Afrikaans sentence ..." So some of these youngsters,
you know, they were encouraged by whites that they should hate me because
I'm a communist. And then in 1989 they started to be ANC members, and
they too now they started to hate me that I'm a Communist, and then they
started to say that, "This man

is a sell-out because he does not want to work with us." I said to them,
these youngsters, "I can't work with children. I am only working with
your parents, not you, you youths, because I am not a youth, I am a grown
up man. I can't do youth work during this time when I am so grown up."
And then they started to say that we should resign from the Council.
Well, I said to them, "We can resign from the Council, but as soon as we
resign everything's going to be at a standstill in your township here,
because you can see what we have done for you, you people here, you
youngsters." Well, that group who were the anti- Comrades, four, five,
six of them, they were now the people really, you know, after us,
howling, harassing us, swearing at us, doing anything to us, making
petrol bombs and all such and such. And then I have to report the matter
to the ANC out in Johannesburg, and then they said they knowing all about
those children, or the so-called youth at Brandfort. Because I make a
report to the ANC that, "These children or these youngsters they used to
be just hooligans, dagga smokers, rapists. How can you call them youths
of the ANC?" And then they sent some delegation to Brandfort there. They
found they couldn't do a thing about it. In 1992 the squabble was just on
- petrol bombing my place and harassing us, and fighting each other. And
then they started to kill some other youths in our township there, the
very same guys who were calling themselves ANC youths. Then it happened
that in 1991 again they said we should resign from the Council. In July,
on the 14th of July, I was at my place there, and I left during the
evening. Because my son is a taxi driver I thought of going to the
station to go and help him with some passengers who were coming into our
area there. Well, I went to the station to help my son. It was around
about half past eight. At 9 o'clock, when I was from the station, I find
my place burning there. The whole cafe was in flames, and I went there
shouting, looking for my wife, I couldn't find my wife there. I called
the police, the police said, "No, we can't do a bloody thing, man, your
place is burning." "So where is my wife?" No, the police couldn't do a -
couldn't help me, so I have to get myself into that burning cafe, drag my
wife out there, out of the cafe. The police were standing there just
looking, because they themselves they did not like me in Brandfort of the
previous cases I had with them. And then I asked them, "Is them no way of
helping me put the flames away?" They said, "Ons kan nie jou help nie,
Mnr Phehlani. Jy wiet ... Afrikaans ..." so my cafe have to burn to
ashes. My wife was right inside there, she was stabbed with a knife,
burnt in the cafe. That's what happened that night.

And, Mr Phehlani, was your son - your son was also attacked, I
understand, is that correct? --- My son was busy delivering the
passengers from the station.

You said in your statement that your young son, Patrick, was also ...
(intervention) --- My young son, Patrick, they were all sitting in the
cafe with my wife there, they were three in the cafe when I left there,
and he was the only person I find there. We dragged him out of the cafe
there, we find that he has got about eight stab holes on him. He couldn't
speak, he was very weak that evening.

Now, according to your statement there was a court case after this
incident. --- That's correct, Mr Chairman.

And certain people were convicted for this attack. --- There were
actually eight of them were.

And who were they? Don't mention their names. Were they from - what
grouping within the township were they from? --- Well, they said they
were the youths of the ANC.

Now, just to correct a couple of things. You and your wife at that stage
were member of the Municipal Council of - is the name of the council
Majemasu. --- Majemasu, that's correct, Mr Chairman.

Which is a township of Brandfort. --- You are correct.

And you also said in your statement that the ANC Youth League in that
area regarded you as a sell-out because you and your wife had joined the
Council, is that correct? --- You are right, Mr Chairman.

Mr Phehlani, does the - what is the name of the group, the Eagles or the
Three Million Gang, mean to you? --- We did not have that Three Million
at Brandfort. We had the Eagles and those who were calling themselves the
ANC Youths. The Three Millions were the guys from Kroonstad, not in
Brandfort.

So the Eagles were a group within the township that you were living? ---
The Eagles was another movement which was run by the Government, because
it seems to me it was sponsored by the Government by that time, not the
local people. And then we had some young youths, or youngsters, who were
the members of the so-called Eagles, but actually it was the movement of
the Government.

And what contact did you have with that movement, the Eagles? --- Well, I
did not have any contact with it because it was something of the youths.
I was not interested to join with youths.

So you know nothing about the Eagles in that township? --- The Eagles
were there, but it's a movement which was run by the youngsters from the
area, and then it was sponsored by the Government as I am saying.

And what did they used to do, the Eagles? --- Well, they used to have
some functions, take these other guys, you know, for picnics and so forth.

As far as you know were they involved in any violent incidents? --- Yes,
at times they were, because the anti- Comrades they were also fighting
those eagles, and then the scholars, who they were also fighting these
Eagles. Because in the long run they thought that just another body of
the Government, you know, to ... (incomplete)

Now, after this incident, this tragic incident in which your wife was
killed and your shop was burnt down, did you remain in that township or
did you leave? --- Yes, I am still in the township, I am still living
there.

And people who were convicted of that, are they still serving prison
sentences? --- It's only one of them that is serving a prison sentence,
because the others were sentenced for malicious damage to property, and
then they were sent for two years in gaol, then with some suspended
sentences, and then they are back again with me in the township. I do see
them daily, and we are always having clashes with them.

And your son, Patrick, has he suffered as a result of that attack? ---
Yes, he's suffering from brain troubles and so forth, you know.

How old is he presently? --- He is born in 1978.

So he was 11 years old at the time of the attack. --- You are correct, Mr
Chairman.

So he's a teenager now. --- He's a teenager.

Did you resign from the Council after this attack on your house? --- No,
I did not resign.

So did you continue to be a councillor until it was dissolved? ---
Correct, Mr Chairman.

And are you still running a business in that township? Did you rebuild
your business? --- Well, I am trying to run a business there, but it's
very poor because now I am financially embarrassed. Everything is burned
down, and no money. The money was also burnt out in the shop there.

Mr Phehlani, thank you very much for coming to us today to tell your
story. It's a very sad story. I am going to ask the Chairman to take over
to see whether there are any other questions other Commissioners would
like to ask.

	---------------------

MR LAX: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr Phehlani, I wasn't clear on your
wife's political activities. Perhaps you could just give us some
indication of what her political allegiances were, or whether she was
involved politically at all, or so on. --- Well, during that specific ...
(intervention)

Besides being on the Council per se, but I am saying what ...
(intervention) --- She was also a politician just like myself previously.

And in what persuasion, if you understand my question? Which party was
she involved with? --- You mean politically or in the Council, or what?

No, politically. --- Politically?

Yes. --- Well, she was also interested within the rest of the township
there, the running of the township and so forth and so forth, you know.

So she was just involved in local issues and not in broader ...
(intervention) --- Local issues and politically.

She wasn't a member of any other political party or anything like that?
--- Well, we were both members of the South African Communist Party.

Thank you.

	---------------------

DR MGOJO: Thank you, Sir. I just want to get clear - did I hear you
saying that you were encouraged by Winnie Mandela to join - to be the
member of the Council, and also encouraged by the community? Did you say
that? --- It's correct, Mr Chairman.

By the time they encouraged you were you still a member of the Communist
Party? --- By that time the parties were all banned. I was restricted and
banned. All the political parties were banned during 1950s.

How much contact did you have with Mrs Winnie Mandela then when she
encouraged you to join this movement, or the Council? --- We used to meet
underground with her because we could not meet just openly.

Were there any other Comrades apart from the youth, the ANC Youth who
were called the Comrades, in Brandfort during this time when these things
were happening to you? --- Yes, we have the grown-ups who are actually
members of the ANC. I worked very much with them, the grown-ups, the
mothers and fathers and so forth, not youths.

When you were receiving this type of treatment from the young people, as
the people who had encouraged you to become a councillor what did they
do? --- By that time there were not so very much against what I was doing
in the township there. It's only - the trouble started only when they
started to fight with the scholars.

Would you say to me that you have the sympathies of the community of
Brandfort? --- It's correct, Mr Chairman, because I had so many cases
against the police there. I was taking my cases with Priscilla Jana. She
was the one dealing with the cases against the police for those children
who were tortured and assaulted, just like that.

The last question. Commissioner Richard Lyster has asked you about the
Eagles. Among these people who were convicted, these people who are put
here in your statement, are they not them, do you know maybe, who were
once the members of this group called Eagles? --- No, they weren't
members of the Eagles, they were all the anti - previously they were
anti-Comrades. It's only recently, '89, that they joined with the ANC.

Thank you.

	---------------------

MR DLAMINI: Thank you, Mr Phehlani. Just one question or two. Are you
still a member of the SACP or any other political organisation? --- I am
still a member of the South African Communist Party.

Can I make a follow up. In the light of the relationship or the alliance
between the SACP and the ANC has there been any effort to try and
reconcile you with the Comrades who were disillusioned with your role in
the Council at that time, now that things are normal? --- Well, with
other members of the ANC we are all in good books. It's only about three
to four of these youths, you know, who seems to me, you know, mainly as
being hooligans. We just ... (inaudible) ... hooligans in there. It's
very hard. They are uneducated, you know, and it's very difficult to get
them right.

	---------------------

MRS GCABASHE: Dr Mgojo has asked some of the questions that I was going
to ask about the Eagles, but I still want to go back to the Eagles. You
said in your statement, Mr Phehlani, that the Eagles used to have
functions. Now, I would like to know whether they were a working group or
what kind? How did they have these functions? Who funded their functions?
--- To me it seems to me that it was funded by the South African
soldiers, because - the Defence Force, because they were sending trucks
to Brandfort to go and fetch this group of children to picnics and so
forth.

My other last question has reference to what you said about the youth,
that they were rapists and they were taking drugs. Now, I would just like
to know whether you as a councillor, or as the body that was looking
after the affairs of the township at that time, what steps did you take
to deal with ... (intervention) --- I tried to report these things to the
police, because most of our residents bring such complaints to me, and
then I report the matter to the police, and then we find that the police
they themselves are doing nothing about these youths. That's the trouble
we are having in the smaller towns, you know, that you find these
youngsters - they call themselves that they are young leaders, they are
leading on a section, but looking at them you find that they are so
terrible, they are hooligans, they are undisciplined. That's what is
happening with me there.

	---------------------

DR MAGWAZA: You have had a difficult time. I am concerned about you and
your son. I would like you to tell me how is your son, Patrick. You said
he has a mental problem. I would like to know more about that problem,
what type of mental problems he's having, and for how long has he been
seen by the doctor? --- Well, he's taking some treatment with the local
doctor there, because the doctor said that it will take him about four to
five years that his brains will function correctly. You know, he goes and
forgets. He forgets - now and then he forgets. You must always remind
him. That's the trouble we are having with him.

You also said you see the doctor because you have to take injections and
tablets to stop you thinking. Are you also feeling -having some mental
problems? --- Myself?

Yes. --- I don't have mental trouble but, you know, I have just got what
I can call heart attack when I am thinking of these things.

You also said you were financially embarrassed. Who is working home now?
--- At present I am not working, I am just trying some means with that -
what I get from my son as a taxi driver and so forth.

Okay, thank you.

	---------------------

MR LAX: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr Phehlani, I just want to pick up on
something that you were asked about earlier, and that was you - I
couldn't hear you clearly unfortunately, so if I am repeating myself
please excuse that - or repeating things that you've already said. You
said that these accused people that were charged with the burning of your
house and the murder of your wife, and then some of whom were convicted,
were members of - and I think you said an anti-Comrade organisation. Is
that correct? --- Previously. They were previously, and then '89 they
started to join with the ANC Youths, then they called themselves the ANC
Youths.

Okay. Now, clearly you would previously have been seen as possibly an
ally of theirs in the sense that the Comrades prior to this incident, and
prior to these people joining the Comrades, were against you, and these
people were against them, so in a sense ... (intervention) --- They were
against me ... (incomplete)

... they were your allies. --- That's correct. It seems to me they were -
the so-called anti-Comrades, it seems to me they were used by the police,
you know, to harass the students that they should forget about their
Afrikaans and so forth.

Now, what I find difficult to understand, and maybe you can help me here,
is how people who were previously your allies then turned against you,
and maybe you can help us understand how that happened. --- After the '76
strikes and so forth, and then this movement of theirs, after they have
killed one of the youngsters in our area there, then they dissolved
themselves, those anti-Comrades, and then they started to make friends,
saying that they were making peace with the students now. So those
students they said, "No, you can join with us," and then they started
joining the ANCs and so on and so on.

What I am interested in is why should they attack you personally? ---
During that time, '76 and '89, they did not attack, but they started to
attack me through 1990 up until 1991.

Yes, I am just interested because after 1990 President Mandela was
released, things started changing, the tensions started easing somewhat,
and then this incident happened in 1991. And so I am just curious as to
how the alliances between you as an SACP person, here are the ANC Youth
and other ANC Comrades in your township, and suddenly there's this quite
serious attack on you. --- I am getting on all right with the grown-ups,
but I am not interested to join with guys which I know that they have
been used by the police to hunt me or, you know, to do things against me,
and they were actually being paid by the police, you know, to do such
things to me.

So you think this was a plot by the police to use these people against
you? --- That was what was happening before.

Thank you.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Just one final question, Mr Phehlani, and it's a difficult
thing to ask you, but I think I must just put it to you. Our
investigators have made inquiries in this area, and there have been
allegations made that you were involved with the Eagles Gang ...
(intervention) --- No.

... and the Security Branch in Brandfort. How do you respond to that? ---
No, it's very wrong, because the very Security guys they were the people
hunting me.

Sorry? --- They were the people arresting me. How can I be in favour of
them who were arresting me? My house has been broken so many times there
by the Security Police. They are searching my house every now and then
for guns, they said I've got guns from Mozambique, guns from Durban, just
like that. My house still remains there with damaged doors by the
Security Police. Making cases against the Security Police, there's
nothing happening there.

Okay, thank you very much, Mr Phehlani.

	---------------------

Is there any organisation where you are of the ANC now? Is there any ANC
organisation in the place where you are now? --- Yes, we are having ANC
there at Brandfort now.

Does it have officials? --- Yes, they do have officials there.

Have they dealt with your case, especially now that everything is
transparent, is open? --- They are so afraid of these youths. They are
afraid.

You say the ANC is afraid of the youth? --- They are afraid of these
youths.

Okay. --- Even in the police they themselves are afraid of these guys,
these youngsters.

	---------------------

Mr Phehlani ... (intervention) --- There are cases which I reported to
the police, but there's nothing happening there.

Mr Phehlani, you have been very patient, having many questions put to
you, and I think it's partly because it's a very confusing picture, which
of course was true of many, many areas in South Africa, of different
loyalties, different groupings, different struggles. I have only just one
last question. You mentioned the names of the people who were arrested.
They were there when your shop was being burnt, they were there when your
son was stabbed, they were there when your wife was killed, when your
other son's car was set alight. A very big case, very serious, and many
of them were charged, but some of them turned State's witness and three
of them, I think, were convicted. Now, in an answer to a question earlier
you said that two of them got light sentences for damage to property, but
one I think was actually - was he found guilty of murdering your wife?
Was that the charge? --- It's correct, Mr Chairman.

Can you remember what the sentence was? --- I've got the press cuttings
here.

Can you just remember was it five years, 10 years? --- He was sentenced
to 10 years, I suppose, Mr Chairman. He was sentenced for 10 years. It
says here, "Afrikaans quotation" That's the press cuttings.

Thank you, that's very helpful, because the question I want to know is,
these people, some who turned State witness, some charged with damage to
property, one for the murder of your wife, did you know any of them? I
mean were these people that you knew before? I mean had you met them, had
you worked with them, or had they worked against you? Were these
strangers or did you know them? --- Mr Chairman, they were not strangers.
They were actually the people who were being helped by my wife, because
every day they were going there asking for food. The very same day they
killed her they were there in the morning session going to ask for some
food.

Thank you. So they were part of the group that used to be the
anti-Comrades and now had become Comrades. --- They had become Comrades.

Okay. Thank you very much. In all the questions we mustn't overlook the
tragedy of violence which has gripped this country for so long, and has
still gripped this country in many part of South Africa. There can be no
excuse for murder, and for arson, and for killing, and you carry a very
heavy load. Whatever your political allegiances were, to have a wife who
was murdered, to have a son who is now not well as a result of severe
stabbings, to have your entire property destroyed, is very serious, and
we don't want you to think for a moment that we don't sympathise deeply
with your loss. And we have heard you, we have heard also the requests
that you have made, and we will certainly be passing that on.

As you know, and perhaps I should explain so that everybody can
understand the procedure, we do not make a decision now. We have to think
about all of these issues very, very carefully, and we make a
recommendation to the President of our country, and he then has to look
at this and, with the help of his advisers, he then makes a
recommendation to Parliament, and Parliament then decides what should
happen. Now, it's unfortunate that all of this always takes time. I wish
I could tell you that tomorrow we will make a decision and all is well,
but bureaucracy doesn't work like that. All I can tell you is that we
will look into the situation very, very carefully, and we will bear in
mind the requests you have made, and I think you very much for coming
today. Thank you. --- Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr
Chairman.

	---------------------

DR BORAINE: You are Pumla Marina Mashoang?

MS MASHOANG: Yes, Sir.

DR BORAINE: And you live at Opkomps in Bloemfontein?

MS MASHOANG: Yes, Sir.

DR BORAINE: A very warm welcome to you. You have been waiting quite a
while already, but there are many others who are even waiting for the
rest of the day. We want you to know that you are in a friendly
environment. You are here to be heard, whatever your story is, and we
look forward to that. But please tell me, you have brought somebody with
you. Can you tell me who that is?

MS MASHOANG: It's my ex-husband.

DR BORAINE: Your ex-husband? Well, I think we should say to him that we
are very grateful to you, Sir, for coming and for supporting your former
wife in this tragedy. I assume that you were the parents of the son?

MS MASHOANG: Yes, Sir.

DR BORAINE: It was your son as well. Thank you. You're going to tell us
about son and what happened to him, but, Mrs Mashoang, I must ask you
please to stand to take the oath.

	---------------------

PUMLA MARINA MASHOANG (Sworn, States)

DR BORAINE: Thank you. Will you be seated please. Mrs Mashoang, my
colleague, Dr Mgojo, is going to take over from me now, and he will
assist you in the telling of your story. Thank you.

DR MGOJO: (Inaudible) ... we are sorry that this has happened to you and
your family, as the Chairperson has already said. I really want you to
give us your background, family background, even before you come to the
narrative itself about this incident about the death of

	/your son.

your son. Can you capture for us your historical family background? ---
Well, Mpho was my first-born son. I have two other kids who are both
mentally retarded. So he was doing his third year at Vista University
here in Bloemfontein.

When was he born? --- He was born on the 22nd of March 1964.

So he was your first-born? --- Yes.

Okay. And when this happened how old was he? --- He was 24.

Pardon? --- He was 24, going for 25.

24. Just tell us about his life, the political associations or such
things. Just tell us the story. --- Okay. Before he came to Vista he had
been at Mabopane Technikon, and there was quite a lot of violence then,
but I didn't know that he was involved in any political organisation
until he came to Vista. Then I noticed that he was somehow inclined
politically. I sat down with him and asked him if he is involved in
politics, and he said to me, "No, it's not a political organisation, it's
just a students' organisation."

When he said that it was not a political organisation, it was a student
organisation ... (intervention) --- I was asking him. In fact I was
saying to him, "I can see that you are involved in politics, and I would
rather you complete your studies before involving yourself too much in
politics." So he said to me, "It is not a political organisation, it is
just a students' organisation." And I believe he was holding a prominent
position because ... (intervention)

Did he tell you what this student organisation was

	/called?

called? --- Yes. He said it was SANSCO.

And did he tell you what its function was? --- No.

Okay. --- He said it was just a students' organisation, and I believe he
was holding a prominent position because he had a van that he had been
given, so I think he was organising for the Free State. In fact he said
he has been given this van, they are using it to organise for this
organisation in the whole of the Free State.

Yes. --- So on the - he left on the 6th of February 1989, saying to me he
is getting to Johannesburg, because this organisation doesn't have enough
funds in the Free State and they have promised to help them with their
education. So he said in order to meet us halfway he is going to
Johannesburg to get funds from the organisation in Johannesburg. And he
had got a telegram that was signed Joe - signed by Joe, that he was
coming. So when this Joe came they came in the morning. There were two of
them in an Opel Kadett car. When this Joe came there were two of them,
and I can't remember what he said this other one's name was. But normally
he used to take me to work, so this other one, the one who died with him,
accompanied him and they took me to work. But this other one remained
home and said he was tired, so Mpho prepared his bedroom for him for him
to sleep there whilst they were taking me to work. At 4 o'clock when I
knocked off Mpho, together with this one ... (incomplete - end of Side A,
Tape 6) ... all three of them were there. They had supper and they left.
During the night - we hadn't locked the back door for them to come in, so
that they don't

	/disturb us.

disturb us. During the night at about 9.00 pm I heard that there was
somebody in the house, so I got up, switched on the light. This other one
who had said he was tired when they came in the morning was sitting in
the lounge on the couch in darkness. Then I switched on the light and
asked him, "Why are you sitting in darkness?" He said, "No, I don't want
to disturb you." But what I noticed was that he was hiding his face, he
didn't want me to be able to see him. Then I asked him where the other
two were. He said they were coming. All right, I left him and I got back
to bed. At about 12 midnight I could hear that Mpho and the other were in
too. Then I asked Mpho, "Are you here?" He said, "No, Mum, I didn't want
to disturb you. We are leaving now." That was the last I saw of him. In
fact I heard from him. The following day when I came back from work I
asked if Mpho hadn't phoned, and they said he hadn't phoned. Then I
suspected that there was something, because he never used to leave home
and not phone for such a long time. Then I started asking his friends,
"Where do you think Mpho is?" None of them knew, and then I said to them,
"Okay, I am now going to the police for them to help me look for Mpho."
And what they said was, "Please, Mama, don't go to the police, because
the minute you go to the police Mpho will be harassed. Every time there's
something he'll be taken to gaol." And from what people used to say,
people who had been in gaol, then I felt I would rather not go to the
police, because I didn't want him to go through what the people said they
go through when they are in gaol. We started trying to look for Mpho
until towards the end of February. Unfortunately I can't remember the
date well.

	/In The

In The Sunday Times there was an article that three schoolchildren, three
students, were killed. The names were there, but fortunately Mpho's name
was wrongly written, so I didn't recognise it. Then that Friday we got a
telephone call from Nelspruit SACC offices to say we should please come
to the SACC offices at Nelspruit. So that Friday night we drove over to
Nelspruit. When we got to Nelspruit we got there Saturday at about 11.00
am, so when we got there those gentlemen who helped us said they think
they have a clue as to where Mpho is, but now we would have to go over to
Swaziland, and because it was a weekend we couldn't go, it had to be the
Monday. We had driven over to Nelspruit being four. It was my husband,
myself, and a friend of mine, a Mrs Ramagaga, and when we got to Virginia
we picked up another gentleman who's my friend's husband. So we all drove
over to Nelspruit. So on noticing that we had to stay over for the
weekend my husband and this gentleman from Virginia came back, and I
remained with Mrs Ramagaga. The Monday morning we left for Swaziland.
When we got to the border I couldn't cross over, I didn't have a
passport, so they said we could get emergency passports at the offices,
which were about two kilometres away. We drove back to those offices.
When we got there they said they didn't have forms for emergency
passports. Then I remained at Nelspruit Hospital. I had a colleague there
I knew. Mrs Ramagaga and these two gentlemen from the SACC offices of
Nelspruit crossed over to Swaziland. I stayed in the hospital that whole
Monday, until in the evening when they hadn't come back they prepared a
bed for me and I slept in the nurses' home. Tuesday morning at about 9
o'clock Mrs Ramagaga came in.

	/They said

They said they couldn't come to me the previous day because they came
back very late from Swaziland. So I asked her if she had found Mpho, and
she said ... (incomplete)

Okay, take time, Mama. --- (Pause) She said they found him at the bush,
and the body was decomposed and she could only identify him by his
haircut. So then we had to come back to Bloemfontein to prepare for the
funeral. Then I phoned these people from the SACC at Nelspruit to find
out if there couldn't be an inquest, and they said from the experience
they have with the Swaziland Police there won't be any inquest, because
they normally say they have a backlog with their inquests, so that - that
was all.

Thank you, Mama. It is a really painful experience indeed. Did you have
any chance maybe of knowing the contents of this telegram from Joe? ---
No, it just said, "We are coming on the 6th."

Up until now you don't know who this Joe is? --- No, I don't.

You don't know him. When they left, Mpho and his other colleagues - can
you name these other people who were his friends? --- The only one I
remember is the one who died with him. It was Mohale. This other one I
can't remember.

Did you know of any person called Portia Shabangu? --- Portia is the one
that they picked up at Nelspruit, Mpho and Mohale and this Portia. They
picked up at Nelspruit Training College from Johannesburg. I don't know
what made them go to Swaziland from Johannesburg.

Do you know where Portia Shabangu is now? ---

	/She died

She died together with Mpho and Mohale.

So when they left they left in a car, is that true? --- They left in a
car, and the people who went to identify them, who went over to
Swaziland, said the car was in a forest in Swaziland with the three
bodies. But the bodies had already been taken to the mortuary, so these
gentlemen from the SACC offices asked the policemen, "All these three
children are not from Swaziland. If you say they were running away
because they had a fight with another group in a hotel, how do you think
they could run to such a place when they don't know Swaziland?"

You say that there was a report from The Sunday Times that three students
have died? --- Yes, Sir. I still have the cuttings.

And they are not named? --- They were named, but Mpho's name was wrongly
written.

Thank you. Did the report say what has caused the death of these
students? --- No, the report - yes, the report said they were found dead
in a forest in Swaziland, but the death certificate that we got was that
the body was riddled with bullets.

Thank you. Did you say what part of Swaziland? Swaziland is so big. What
part were the bodies found in Swaziland? --- They just said in a forest.
I don't know whether it's in - I can't remember whether it was Mbabane or
- I don't know.

The name Mbunya, does it say anything to you? --- Mbunya?

Mbunya Forest, does it say anything to you? --- I can't remember the name
of the forest, Sir.

	---------------------

	/DR BORAINE:

DR BORAINE: Thank you, Dr Mgojo. Are there any questions at all? Yes.

MRS GCABASHE: I do notice that you are in real pain, and what has touched
me a lot in your statement is when you said, "My whole life changed since
his death." Can you tell us exactly how did your life change after the
death of your son? --- I took time before I went to church, because he
was a church choir member. So the church choir sits in front. For about
three months I couldn't go to church because I didn't want to see that
empty space where he used to sit.

So that was the main change that happened to you? --- That was the main
change.

Okay. The other thing which I wanted to clarify was that you were not
aware that he was an ANC member until ... (intervention) --- Until I saw
it in the newspaper.

... you saw it in the newspaper. --- Otherwise I knew that he was a
SANSCO member.

Have you made any attempt to speak to the ANC organisation or members?
--- About?

In case they would know about whatever happened to him, because having
been an ANC member? --- No, I haven't made any attempt.

Okay. Ja, I think that's all I would have liked to clarify from you.
Thank you.

	---------------------

MR DLAMINI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I know, Mrs Mashoang, whether you
know the parents of the other two students who were with Mpho, whether
there is any contact? --- Well, when we met at Nelspruit we were

	/with

with Mohale's father from Johannesburg, and Portia's uncle, because
Portia happened to be an orphan who was being educated by her uncle.
Otherwise I saw them there for the first time, and I have never seen them
thereafter.

Do you perhaps have their contacts in case we want to find out from them
whether they have any information that could assist in the investigation?
--- Unfortunately no.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.

	---------------------

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. It's difficult to know what to say to
you. To lose your only son is very heavy. --- Sorry, Sir, he was not my
only son, he was my first-born.

He was your first son? Your first son. I am so sorry I made that mistake.
It's still a very, very heavy burden to lose your first-born, or any
member of a family, and not to know what happened and how he came to die
is an added burden. We have found many times that sometimes when people
know what happened it helps. It doesn't heal entirely, but it helps to
carry the burden, and we will see what we can try and find out from the
various reports that have been made. And we will have to inquire from the
Swaziland Police to see if there was a record in their files as to any
information which they might have.

You mentioned that you feel - in your statement that is, not today, but
in your statement - that somewhere there should be a monument to
remember, particularly perhaps, the young people who died during the
struggle. --- Yes.

This is something which we have been thinking about

	/very deeply,

very deeply, and we will certainly try and consider and then make a
recommendation to the President that somewhere, somehow, and some place,
there should be a visible sign of the nation's gratitude and the nation's
memory of people who died during the whole time of the great struggle and
conflict in our country.

We thank you again very warmly for coming. You've been very brave and we
trust that the experience of coming here today will in some way assist
you. Thank you very much. Thank you.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Bhaki George Morake, okay. Thank you, Mr Morake. Before you
give your evidence I am going to have to ask you to take the oath, and
I'd like you to stand to do that please. Can you hear me sufficiently?
Can you hear me well?

	---------------------

BHAKI GEORGE MORAKE (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: Mr Morake, you are here to tell us your story, which relates
to the attack and burning of your house in August 1987 in Botshabelo
township. Thank you for coming to Bloemfontein today to tell us that
story. It's a sad story, and it speaks of political intolerance, which
was the order of the day, which was very common in this country at that
time, and of course is still very common in many parts of our country
notwithstanding the political changes that we have seen. I am going to
ask one of my colleagues, Mr Mdu Dlamini, to assist you in taking you
through your statement today.

MR DLAMINI: Thank you. Good morning, Mr Morake. --- Good morning, Sir.

And again we are faced with a situation where, because of differences
based on political and ideological affiliations, people had to suffer,
and you are one of those cases. And we are grateful that you have offered
to share your experiences with the people of South Africa so that we know
what has been happening, and as one of the objectives of the Truth
Commission we make sure that things of this nature should not take place
again. It is a sad thing to experience loss of your property at an age of
50, when this happened, and with your wife who was 49 when she suffered
the injuries and all the pains. Would

	/you like

you like to tell us what happened on that particular day, and all the
subsequent events? --- Before I start, there was a boy named Aron Mohutu.
He was an ANC Youth League member. He used to come to me and recruit me
to join them and stop being a member of a Dikwankwetla. I told him that I
wouldn't be able to join them. It took time, and thereafter he came to
me. He said they were talking about me at the Catholic Church, that if I
don't join the ANC Youth League they were going to attack me after two
weeks and they were going to kill me. I will never ever get any
forgiveness. He said he talked to them not to do that, then he was giving
me two weeks to decide. I refused and told them that I wouldn't join
them. On that very same year that I had my supermarket I lost my
supermarket. I tried to earn some living, so I went to Cape Town, to
Johannesburg, as well as Durban. When I came back in August 1987 I saw
Casspirs in my yard. It was on a morning. That is when I saw my property
burning. That was my bedroom suite, as well as saxophones, trumpets,
trombones and base tenor, together with property to the value of R4
000,00. By then I had already opened up a tuck shop which had stock that
was worth R6 000,00. They told me that I was an informer. The Comrades
kept on harassing me. My life was now in danger, and by then I was a
member of - a parliamentarian during T K Mopede's reign. They kept on
harassing me and attacking me until 1990. By then I bought a kombi, and
they prevented the people from boarding my kombi, until 1990 they
attacked my home for the second time. It was round about quarter to eight
when I went to J Section. I met with my wife along the way. She was
bleeding. She had hired a car and she

	/told me

told me that our home was being attacked. When I got there I found the
furniture burnt down. The windows were broken with stones. I don't know
how big were these stones. There was absolutely nothing that was
salvaged. All my property had been burnt down. I asked her about the
children, then she said she had hidden them in the toilet. Then they were
saying to me why can't I call Mopede to come and help me. I kept on being
attacked until I took him to Qwa-Qwa. I still feel very painful about my
property that got lost. My contract was stopped. I still remember it was
Mr Tele Shuping. I had bought stock to the value of R33 000,00. They told
me I must go to Qwa-Qwa because I am a Sotho. He threw me with my
identity document and told me that, "It's been long that I have been
telling you to go to Qwa-Qwa." I went to Botshabelo and I lost that R33
000,00-worth of stock. And at some stage I got my shop broken into and
all the stock stolen. From 1987 my first wife had lost her mind - until
the 1984 elections (sic), when we separated. I was helping the students
at that time. State President P W Botha had a law that said the children
shouldn't eat during break time. During that time I was hiding those
students in my offices in the storeroom. When the police came they used
to ask me why I didn't give them permission to come in and assault the
children. I told them I was against the government of the day. Thereafter
I felt very bad when the youth of Botshabelo turned against me, whereas I
was fighting for their rights and I was fighting that they shouldn't be
assaulted. I feel very bad. It's a wound that will never heal to me,
because I left my house in Thaba Nchu that I had recently built, which
could

	/be to the

be to the value of R39 000,00. I had a double garage. I had to leave the
house because I was a Sotho, and I had to go to Botshabelo or Qwa-Qwa
because I was a Sotho. Throughout my life I have lost so much. Thank you.

Thank you, Mr Morake. Can I ask a few clarifying questions? Can you tell
us more about your family and the children, and also in relation to this
incident? Are they okay? Did they suffer any injury or whatever
ill-treatment? --- They were treated very badly. Even the schools refused
to admit them because they were children of a Dikwankwetla members. The
teachers, as well as the schoolchildren - they were being chased away and
they just didn't enjoy their school lives. Thereafter it happened that my
other child was affected mentally, ended up smoking dagga.

You mentioned that your first wife became mentally disturbed. Was it as a
result of the bombing or the burning of your house? --- Yes, I could say
that, because immediately thereafter she changed so drastically. She
might have suffered some anxiety, because she didn't really act like a
normal person.

What is she doing now? --- She doesn't work at the moment.

And yourself, you mentioned that your business initiatives were
destroyed. How are you earning a living? What is your occupation? As well
as the children. What is everybody else in the family doing? --- At the
moment I have started opening up a tuck shop. I am trying to earn a
living by selling in the tuck shop. I've opened it in my yard.

From people who attacked your house you mentioned

	/Aron Mohutu

Aron Mohutu, but I am not sure whether you mentioned him as somebody who
came to recruit you, or whether he was part of the people who actually
attacked your premises. Can you tell us more about the people you
identified from the group who attacked you on those particular occasions?
--- He used to come to me and ask me as a member of the ANC Youth League.
He used to ask me to come and join them and leave the Dikwankwetla party.
Thereafter the people who attacked my house, according to my wife's
version, I don't know them, I have never seen them. But during the day I
used to meet quite a group of people, and they used to go around my yard
wanting to kill me. I don't see some of them any more, but there is a
Tsyetsi amongst them. I know some of them right now, but I don't know
their names. They are still there.

(Inaudible) ... to give us some identifying particulars if we were to
make a follow up? --- Yes, I can point some of them even though I don't
know their names. Some of them, when we were making the rallies, they
used to come and wreak havoc in the rallies, and insult us in many
occasions. I know them by seeing them.

You mentioned that the matter was reported to the police, but there was
no - no progress was seen. Can you tell us more of the action that was
taken by the police and the subsequent progress? --- As I had already
said the police came. I thought they would take further steps. They came
the second time, but there was absolutely nothing that they did until
now. I have also mentioned that during our meetings I took the reports to
the police, but there was nothing that was done.

Which police station did you report to? --- I

	/went to

went to the Botshabelo Police Station.

Thank you, Mr Chairman, can I hand over back to you.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you. Thank you, Mr Morake, I just want to ask my fellow
Commissioners and Committee Members whether they have any questions which
they want to put to you.

For our records, by the way the police at the Botshabelo Police Station,
what type of police? You know our land was so fragmented that there are
so many different types of police. What type of police were these? --- It
was SAP Police.

You have said that you were a Member of Parliament. Was there any attempt
to protect you from these acid experiences which had confronted you from
your Government? --- Our Chairperson, Dr T K Mopede, spoke to the SAP to
protect our homes, so they protected our homes as from that time.

So you did get bodyguards later. --- Yes, we did.

	---------------------

Mr Morake, in your statement you said when you were in Thaba Nchu you
were being harassed because you were Sotho-speaking people. I want to
know, when you say your children were being harassed at school, what
school was that. Was it Thaba Nchu School, or what? --- I had hired or
leased Mr Shuping's shop. We had a contract. Then when I was 10 months in
the shop he told me to vacate his shop. I asked him what were the
reasons. Then he said he wanted to open up a supermarket with another
person called Mr Sihumed, who was in the Bophutatswana

	/Parliament

Parliament. Then I said we had signed a contract. He

told me that as soon as the month ends I should vacate the property
because he needed the shop. An attorney called Mr Tekula tried to take
the case, but I told him not to do it.

Were your children in Thaba Nchu at that time? Did they attend school in
Thaba Nchu? --- Before we went to Botshabelo they were in Thaba Nchu.
That was in 1978/79.

Thank you.

	---------------------

DR MGOJO: Just one question I forgot. In your statement you have
yourself, George Morake, and Hilda Mogapi, who I think is your second
wife, isn't it? And you have just told us that your first wife has
suffered mental disturbance. Didn't you consider her as a victim, your
first wife? --- Yes, I think she is, because at that time when our house
was petrol bombed the bomb fell on the bed on which she was sleeping.
Then I noticed thereafter that she was quite depressed. I took her as a
victim, or I am taking her as a victim too.

(Inaudible) ... ask us to add her here too as a victim, because in the
statements here she does not appear as a victim. --- I would be very
grateful if you would include her as a victim.

Is she getting any treatment? --- She isn't getting any treatment.

What is her name by the way? --- Her name is Constance Gile Bogile.

	---------------------

Mr Morake, thank you very much for coming to the

	/Commission

Commission today and telling your story, which we have heard is a sad
story, and as I've said, it talks very loudly about political
intolerance. The telling of the story can, I hope - the telling of the
story by yourself in public, I hope it can be of some assistance to you
in lifting the burden which you have carried, and I hope also that it can
be of assistance to those who are listening in this hall, to those who
are listening on radio and on television.

Our country has been nearly destroyed by political divisions, political
intolerance, and you have been a direct victim of that political
intolerance. And I hope that the telling of this story will send out a
message to those listening of the tragedy and the misery that is the
consequence of political intolerance. And it is ironic that those people
who attacked you, destroyed your property, were in a general way
themselves protesting against the political intolerance that was
represented by the apartheid Government, and it's ironic that they too
acted in a violent and undemocratic way.

You will have heard Dr Borain this morning talking about what the
Commission could do for a person like yourself, and you will have heard
him say that the Commission has no power to offer you immediate
assistance. Our job is to make recommendations to the President, who will
in turn discuss this matters with his Cabinet, and the Cabinet will then
request Parliament to put into effect their policies and their
recommendations. So we cannot here and now offer you any immediate
assistance, but we hope, as I have said, that the telling of this

story has assisted you in some way, and I feel sure that

	/it has been

it has been of assistance to those listening here and around the country.
Thank you very much, and we wish you well. --- Thank you very much.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Can you hear me, Mrs Daseko?

MRS DASEKO: Yes, I can hear you.

MR LYSTER: Thank you. Thank you for being with us today. You have come to
tell us a story about the death of your son, and you, like many, many
other people who have appeared before this Commission, not only here in
Bloemfontein, but in many other parts of the country, have suffered the
loss of a family member, very often a son. And we - through the
experiences of others, and through the public suffering that they have
undergone, we know something of the suffering that you too are
undergoing. And I am going to ask you to tell us about the death of your
son, but before that I'll ask you to stand please, so that you can take
the oath. Could you stand up please.

	---------------------

MRS G S DASEKO (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mrs Daseko. I am going to ask one of my colleagues,
Dr Magwaza, to assist you in the giving of your evidence. Dr Magwaza.

DR MAGWAZA: Mama Daseko, before I start I would like to say to you that
the saddest thing this morning is to have to listen to the number of
young people who lost their lives simply because they were fighting for
their rights, and I want to say that the loss of sons is not for you as a
mother, but is for all the women in South Africa, because we all are
mothers and have sons. And to be humble enough to say that we can never
fully understand the experience and the pain you have gone through, but
we are here to support you. Mama, can you begin by telling me more about
your family? I would like to get a good sense of who your son was. --- My
son was Sam Daseko.

	/Your son

Your son was Sam Daseko. I would like to know how old was Sam, what he
was doing at the time of his death, does he have brothers and sisters,
does he have a father? --- Sam was a student. He was my son. He was the
only one. I have got two children. The other one is older. I was staying
with Sam. At that time he was in standard nine. Every Saturday when he
was at home he used to get piece jobs, then he would further his own
education with the remuneration that he got. It was on Saturday and I was
in Bloemfontein when Sam got injured, and I heard from Brother Montsiwa.
Sam was at Mr Groen's farm, at his grandmother's house, and grandmother's
son came to me. It was on a Sunday. It was late in the afternoon when I
came back from Bloemfontein, and he came to me and he said, "Can we
please go to the police station. We have to go and look for Sam, because
the police came, they took him, and they beat him up. He was already
injured and we tried to stop them. The two policemen left and they came
back. When they came back the kicked the door at Granny's house and they
picked Sam up. One of them - they held him with both his hands and his
feet, and they threw him into the van and they drove off." When we
arrived at the police station on Sunday we didn't find them, but we did
ask them. We did ask a few policemen who were there. We asked them, "Do
you know anybody who is called Sam?" They looked into their files and
they didn't find anybody by the name of Sam, and they said to us, "No, we
don't have Sam on our files." It was Sunday afternoon and we had to come
back home. On Monday we went back to the police station. We wanted to
meet Mr Morakile and Shele. We only got hold of Morakile, and Brother
Montsiwa asked him,

	/he said,

he said, "Morakile, where did you take Sam, because you picked him up
yesterday?" Morakile's response was, "We took Sam and we dropped him off
at number one. Brother Montsiwa asked him further. He said, "How could
you drop him off at number one after having assaulted him in that way?
You should have taken him home." Morakile said to him, "I promise you we
dropped him off zone one." After a while that we've been there speaking
to Morakile another gentleman came in. He was working at the
municipality, because he used to drive these big lorries, these lorries
with big tanks to sprinkle the water in our roads so that there is no
dust. And he said, "We've seen a body in the bush," and he said, "I think
it's a boy." I said to them, "I am sure that is the body of my son." The
police said to me, "No, don't mind, you will go to the hospital so that
you can identify whether is it your son or not." Truly we went with my
brother, Mr Montsiwa, we went to Maroka Hospital, and when we arrived
there my son was there at the mortuary. I think they have been kicking
him around like a ball. He was full of soil. You couldn't look at him.
(Pause)

Okay, Mama. Take your time. (Pause) --- We found him at the hospital.
Because I had nothing with me I told my sister's children in
Bloemfontein, and they came to take him from the hospital to the - from
the mortuary hospital, and they took him to Bloemfontein and they helped
me with the burial arrangements. I think we went to court two times, if
not three times. When we were supposed to go for the fourth time we were
told that the case is no longer there, the charges have been dropped. And
Morakile is still working, he is still a policeman.

	/I stayed

I stayed with him in the house. I don't have a husband. He was the father
in the house. I don't know what will these people think today. They are
still working and I am starving.

Mama Daseko, that's a very painful experience. I think you have been
through a very, very difficult time. We would like to know more about
what happened to Sam. I will ask you just a few questions. Could you tell
us on what date was Sam arrested by the police? --- It was on a Saturday.
He was from a temporary job that he was doing. I was in Bloemfontein, and
I left him at home. I think he was from home, heading to his
grandmother's house, and on his way the police picked him up. You know,
the police wanted to know why did he have blood on his shirt.

(Inaudible) ... grandmother's place? --- The police picked him up and
they took him to the grandmother's house, and the grandmother told them,
"No, this boy was on his way to my home." The police left him there. And
Granny gave him clean clothes, and after a few minutes after he had gone
to bed the police came back and they kicked the door. They did not knock
at the door, they just kicked the door, and they picked him up. The other
one picked him up with his hand and a leg, and the other one the same,
and they threw him into the van and they drove off.

Had they harassed him before, or were they known to you? --- When I saw
them the first time I knew them.

(Inaudible) ... they done anything to him before? --- Nothing. It was
their first time to see him on his way to his granny, and they just
picked him up.

	/One other

One other thing, Mama. What - he had some bloodstains on the shirt. Where
did those bloodstains come from? --- These were the origins, the
bloodstains. He was bleeding through his nose.

(Inaudible) ... by the police? --- The police saw him with the blood on
his chest. He was bleeding - just bleeding from the nose, the original
bleeding from the nose, and they accused him of the blood on his shirt
and they assaulted him for that.

(Inaudible) ... political organisation at that time? --- Sam used to tell
me that he was going to meetings, but I couldn't understand him what
meetings was he - which meetings was he going to. I think it was fond of
the ANC.

I would like also to know at that time when Sam was assaulted were there
other people in the area that were being assaulted? What was happening at
that time in Thaba Nchu? --- Sam was assaulted alone on the farm. He was
on his own.

But was it a time when other kids were being assaulted at different times
at different dates in Thaba Nchu? Was this thing that it was common for
young kids to be assaulted in Thaba Nchu? --- I have never heard of any
kids that have been assaulted around Thaba Nchu. Nothing of that kind
happened.

I've heard you more than once refer to this policeman, Morakile, who
assaulted and killed your son, and that he is still working. Where is
Morakile now? Where is he working? --- He is working at the police
station in Thaba Nchu. He is a policeman.

The last question I would like to ask from you is, now that your son,
Sam, is dead, and you were saying that

	/Sam was

Sam was your son who was also supporting you, who is also - who is
supporting you now? Are you working, are you getting a pension? How do
you make a livelihood? --- I am not working. I don't get pension. I am a
vendor. I sell oranges and peanuts.

Tell me lastly, what has changed in you since the death of your son? Are
you still the same person? What has changed in you? --- There is a lot of
difference, because at times I would feel my heart shaking, and sometimes
- so many things have changed in my life. I get terrible headaches at
times.

(Inaudible) ... doctor? --- Yes. I normally go to the doctor after
getting some income from selling the peanuts and oranges.

Your grandmother is the only witness now, according to what you have
here, because your brother has died, who was also a witness. Is there
anybody else you can think of who could be a witness to this case? Were
these the only two people who saw what happened? --- Yes, I think those
were the only to people, because it was in the evening and he was at
their place.

Thank you very much. I would like it over to our Chairperson here.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mrs Daseko. Can you just confirm for me when this
happened? You said it happened on a Saturday, but you didn't tell us the
year in which it happened. It's important for the purposes of our records
that we know which year it was. Can you remember? It doesn't appear in
your statement either. Can you remember what year you buried your son?
--- It was in 1990. It

	/was in

was in July, on the 8th of July, if I still remember well.

And that happened in Zone One, Thaba Nchu, is that correct? --- Yes, in
Thaba Nchu.

Mrs Daseko, thank you very much for sharing your story with us today.
We've heard stories similar to yours from so many - particularly so many
mothers about the deaths of their children, and previously when we heard
about these things, particularly for those of us who did not experience
suffering over the past years, we would read about it in the newspaper,
or we would hear it on a radio that this person or that person had died,
and it would come across to us as a number, as a statistic. And what is
important about your story is that we realise that for every number, for
every statistic, for every person who died, that there was a mother and a
father, and perhaps a family who mourned those people, that for every
person - the person who died was precious to somebody else who was left
behind. And if we think of how many people like your son have died over
the last 10, or 20, or 30 years, we get some idea of the amount or the
extent of emotional loss and suffering that his weighing down on this
country like a grey cloud.

And so we hope that just by telling your story, not only to us here, but
to those people in the hall, and to the many, many people, the thousands
of people who are listening to it on the radio now, we hope that it makes
your burden a little bit lighter, and that it will make those who are
listening to your story even more determined that this sort of thing
should not happen again in our country.

The Commission will do its best to try and find out

	/further

further details about how your son died, and why he died, but that cannot
be done immediately, these things take time, but details will be given to
you when we are in possession of those details.

So thank you again very much for coming, and we wish you well and we wish
you strength. Thank you.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Can you hear me, Mr Moyhilwa?

MR MOYHILWA: Yes.

MR LYSTER: Can you tell me how to pronounce your name correctly? Is it
Moyhilwa?

MR MOYHILWA: It's Moyhilwa.

MR LYSTER: Thank you for coming to tell us your story today. You, like
the person before you, will be telling us a story about the loss of a
family member in December 1989. Before you tell us your story I'd ask you
to please stand and take the oath.

	---------------------

MODISI ELIAS MOYHILWA (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: Thank you very much. I am going to ask my fellow Commissioner,
Dr Mgojo, to assist you in the giving of your evidence. Dr Mgojo.

DR MGOJO: Thank you, Sir. Mr Moyhilwa, I am sure it must be very sad for
you to have lost your brother. You know, when you grow as brothers you
support each other, you fellowship together, you have jokes and
everything in a family, and the life in the family becomes exciting. And
you were deprived of the privilege. Can you please tell us about your
family, your mother, brothers, sisters, etcetera? --- The first thing I
would like to say is as from 1982 we went to Botshabelo.

(Inaudible) ... just tell us about your family. How many are you in your
family? Do you have a mother, do you have a father, etcetera? Just the
family, before telling us about the story of what happened. --- Yes, I
have a mother and a father, and four sisters and three brothers.

(Inaudible) ... they live. --- They all live in

	/Botshabelo.

Botshabelo.

Thank you. Just now tell us about your brother and what happened to him.
--- My brother started getting involved in politics in 1987 in
Botshabelo. He joined the South African Youth Congress under the ANC. In
1989 on the 25th of December he went to the U Section, visiting for
Christmas or for the festive season. On that very same night of the 25th
of December - there was a political organisation called Dikwankwetla.
They also call themselves Mopede's Reserves. On that very same night they
attacked my aunt's home and my brother was there. When they were asked as
to what was the problem they said they were looking for the Comrades. My
aunt never wanted to open the door, she refused. Thereafter they kicked
the door. They bore holes into the door. It was no longer a door. Then
they went away and they promised that they were going to come back on the
26th of December. My aunt, as well as my elder brother, as well as my
aunt's children, they just thought they were threatening, but the
following day at 8 o'clock in the morning there came a group of people.
They were more than 100. When my aunt went outside to ask them as to what
they were looking for, they were still looking for the Comrades. They
said she must take the Comrades out of the house because they were
looking for them. My aunt flatly refused. They held her, they took her to
another man's place where they made arms or weapons. I asked what the
name was, they told me it was Mr Mokwena. When they took her to Mr
Mokwena's place at U Section they harassed and assaulted her and said
they wanted the Comrades. They left her, they went to try and attack my
elder brother, as well as my aunt's children.

	/They wanted

They wanted my brother mainly because they said they were burning houses.
But when I look at the U Section there wasn't even a single house that
was burnt down. When they got there they stabbed my elder brother, they
shot him with arrows. My brother tried to run away, he ran to my other
aunt, but they chased him, they followed him with spears. My aunt's
children also ran away. When they got to my other aunt at the W Section
my aunt closed the door and they remained outside. She said that she
didn't want her house to be destroyed. There was a shack outside at my
aunt's place. My brother went into this shack. My aunt's children were
able to get into the house. When this mob came, this very same
Dikwankwetla mob, they tore the shack apart because they were looking for
my brother. When my brother came out they chopped his head with a panga.
My brother tried to run away, but he fell on the street. Each and every
one of them wanted to take his part or to make his share. Then they
started stabbing him each one of them. When we went to report to the
police the police asked us whether my brother was dead already. They came
after three hours. When one of my aunt's children went to report to our
other elder brother at home - he's also staying at the W Section - my
elder brother went to my home. It was round about 10. When he went to my
parents he told my parents, but they just couldn't believe it. He didn't
die at that very same moment. He was taken after three hours. He was
taken to the Universitas Hospital in Bloemfontein. That's where he died
at 12 o'clock in the evening. Our father went to Universitas to look for
him, as well as my other sister. They were told that only my father could
see my brother

	/because his

because his condition was not satisfactory, he was critical. That was the
end of my brother.

(Inaudible) ... indeed, and very shocking. Now, because I want to help
your record to be straight, so that when investigations are made we'll
ask certain questions. Mosala Petros Moyhilwa is your eldest brother. ---
No, he is the one - he actually comes after me.

(Inaudible) ... your younger brother. And you have named here in your
narration about eldest brothers. What is their name? --- The eldest one
is Jonas Moyhilwa, the second one is Chidi Moyhilwa.

(Inaudible) ... in now? --- They are working at a mine in Welkom.

Did they belong to any organisation when this was happening to your
younger brother? --- No, they were not members of any political
organisation.

And you, did you belong to any organisation? --- I was a member of
SAICCOR under ANC.

And did your father belong to any organisation, or your mother? --- He
was just an ordinary person. He didn't belong to any political
organisation.

Thank you. You mentioned two aunts, one living in U Section and one
living in W Section. Can you tell us their names? --- The one who stays
at the U Section is Matseko Agnes Raputsi. The one who stays in W Section
is Maria Raputsi.

Thank you. You said here there were two invasions. There was the first
one, which happened at U Section. Was there any report then during the
first one which was made to the police? --- In the first attack the
police were told. My aunt's child went to report, but they said he

	/was just

was just drunk and they won't respond to that.

(Inaudible) ... for the sake of the record, at Botshabelo what type of
police were they, SAP or some other type of police? --- They were the
South African Police.

South African Police. So they used, these people who killed your brother,
knobkerries and also pangas, according to your later statement. Is that
true? --- Yes, that's true.

Do you know these people who belong to this apartheid agents(?) or
Mopede's Reserve? Do you know them? --- Yes, I can identify them, but I
only know two of them by names.

Who are those? --- It's Mokwena and Mokala.

(Inaudible) --- Yes, one of them stays at U Section and the other one
fled. He ran away from the township.

(Inaudible) --- No, I don't have an idea.

Here in this area what was happening between the Comrades and the
Mopede's Reserve? What was happening? --- I want to start by relating
what happened in 1988. Mopede had gone to Dewetsdorp. I don't remember
which month it was. He said Botshabelo needs people who will help the
Dikwankwetla and support them so that they could be reserves. They were
busy threatening people at the U Section. People couldn't go out freely
in the streets.

(Inaudible) ... you family. Were the other members of your family
intimidated by the police? --- The police used to come regularly and they
used to threaten us just before my brother was buried. They told us that
he shouldn't be buried in the ordinary manner that Comrades

	/are buried,

are buried, he should be buried just like an ordinary man in the street.

(Inaudible) ... was he buried? --- It was just an ordinary burial, a
politician's burial as we are used to.

(Inaudible) --- On that day of the funeral, that was on the 6th of
January, the police came when we were from the cemetery. They came and
dispersed people using the tear gas. Other people didn't even go to our
home, they just went to their respective homes.

(Inaudible) --- Yes.

What is the state of your mother and father at the present moment? --- My
mother and father, after the death of my elder brother, both of them
suffered from high blood. They are still very sick, but my father is
working, as sick as he is.

(Inaudible) ... any treatment, medical treatment? --- No, because there's
no money. They can't afford to get medical attention.

	---------------------

I just have one more question. You said that your brother was taken to
hospital after three hours. Why did it take so long for him to be taken
to hospital? Was it because of the police interference? --- At that time
the police were working with the apartheid organisations, as well as the
Kwankwetla, as well as the other parties. That is why it happened like it
did.

(Inaudible) ... take him to hospital as soon as he was assaulted as a
family? --- I stay at the J Section, and it's very far from the place at
which this took place. It could be five kilometres or more.

	/You said

You said your two other brothers were working at the mines. Which mines
were they working at? --- The other one was working at Hardmon, the other
one was working at Reetrix Mine. It's Harmony Gold Mine and Beatrix Mine.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Mr Moyhilwa, the fact that you have come here today to tell us
your story indicates that you loved your brother. He has been taken away
from you and the rest of your family. You have lost his support, his
company, forever, and it was political intolerance engendered by the
policy of apartheid that has caused that. In the Free State you are
fortunate that those days have passed, and in most areas in this province
people are free to express their political views.

As you know, in some areas of this country that is still not possible. In
many parts of KwaZulu-Natal, for example, people are still murdering each
other because they support different political parties, and we know about
the terrible suffering that that causes, and we hope very much that the
day will come very soon that the people of that area will also be able to
experience the political freedom that you now experience, and that has
been brought about in part by the sacrifices that were made by people
like your brother.

So we thank you very much for coming here today and telling us your
story, and we hope that having told us that story, not only to us, but to
the nation, to those who are listening, that you are able to carry the
burden of the loss of your brother a little easier. We will do what we
can to find out more about your brother's death,

	/why he

why he died, and that will be done over the course of the next months,
and those details will be conveyed to you.

Thank you very much for coming.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you for coming to be with us today, Mrs Tshale. Could
you please fit the earphones onto Mrs Tshale. Can you hear me through the
earphones, Mrs Tshale, can you hear my voice?

MRS TSHALE: Yes, I can hear you, Sir.

MR LYSTER: Could you please tell us who you have with you today?

MRS TSHALE: This is my daughter, Sir.

MR LYSTER: But as we understand it you will be giving evidence today, not
your daughter, is that correct?

MRS TSHALE: Yes, that's correct.

MR LYSTER: Thank you. You, like many, many others, have come again to
tell a tragic story about the loss of a loved one, this time your
husband, and we express our deep sympathy to you, as his wife, and to you
as his daughter. Before you give your evidence, Mr Tshale, please can you
stand to take the oath.

	---------------------

MAMARAMA TSHALE (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: I am going to ask one of my colleagues, Mr Ilan Lax, to assist
you in the giving of your evidence. Mr Lax.

MR LAX: Thank you, Chairperson. Good afternoon, Mrs Tshale, and welcome.
--- Good afternoon, Sir.

Before we start would you just briefly tell us about your family, how it
is made up? We know you are from Botshabelo, but just some details of
your family and your children and so on please. --- I have seven
children. It's four boys - it's eight children. I have four boys and four
girls.

Now, your husband was born in 1943 on the 22nd of

	/January,

January, is that correct? --- That is the correct date, Sir.

Thank you. Would you - the other thing about your husband which I would
like you to confirm was he was a trade union member, is that also
correct? --- Yes, that's correct, Sir.

Thank you very much. Would you now please tell us about the events and
circumstances that led to his death. --- It was on a Thursday morning. He
went to a meeting because he belonged to an organisation called
Dikwankwetla. They had a strike for seven months and they weren't going
to work. Then there were PAO lorries, as well as the lorries - GG
lorries. Only a few tractors were working on that day when the seniors
came from Bloemfontein to negotiation on their behalf to go to work. All
the lorries from the PAO, as well as the tractors, were followed by the
Hippos. And they went to the meeting, and that is where my husband was
shot. They were sitting waiting for the members of their organisation to
come and negotiate on their behalf. He was sitting down with other
gentlemen. He was the fourth one. They shot him while he was still
sitting and they were playing a certain game. They shot him five houses
from where he was. It was on a Thursday, and the women from the Roman
Catholic Church were in their large numbers because it was their day of
prayer. If I am not mistaken it was at about 3 o'clock or two a certain
lady came to me and she said to me, "Mrs Tshale, know that Mr Tshale has
been shot dead and he had three wounds on his chest." That is the version
I know. I will end up there.

Mrs Tshale, now just very briefly, you talk about

	/PAO vehicles.

PAO vehicles. Is that Provincial Administration vehicles? --- Yes, those
are the PAO, Provincial Administration cars.

And the GG vehicles, is that Government Garage? --- It was then called
GG, but it's now called PAO. Yes, that's correct, Sir.

Now, this incident happened outside the Roman Catholic Church Hall in
Botshabelo. In what section is that? --- It's at E Section - at C Section.

C Section? --- Yes, Sir, that's at C Section. It is at the St Charles
Roman Catholic Church.

Thank you very much. Now, do you have any idea of which people witnessed
the shooting of your husband directly? --- I know of people who saw the
incident.

Would you kindly give us their names please? --- Maketa was their leader.
The other one is Mr Richard, and there was a lady called Maysie. Well, I
do not remember some of them because there were so many of them coming to
my house.

Where would we be able to get hold of Mr Maketa, for example? --- He is
working at the PAO offices in Botshabelo.

Now, I can just confirm that you have given us a copy of your husband's
death certificate, is that correct? --- Yes, I gave you a copy.

Do you know whether any inquest was held in relation to your husband's
death? --- Three times we've been to the court, but on the last I was
taken because there were no witnesses, and I was then told - the
Magistrate told me that he was informed by the police that he was
defending himself and he decided to shoot. The church door was full

	/of bullet

of bullet holes. Five police were giving evidence, were testifying. There
were two black policemen and three white policemen. The policeman who
shot my husband, and I did see him, and I was told that that will be the
end of everything. And they consoled me, they said I should forget about
that, and they didn't ask me what my plans were with my husband. Nothing
was said to me. I wasn't asked anything. The next day there was another
court case and I was told that everything will stop there. Even if I
don't come it doesn't matter. The policeman who shot my husband got
himself a lawyer ... (incomplete - end of Side B, Tape 7) ... yes, there
is a Magistrate's Court in Botshabelo.

Thank you. Now, since this time that your husband has died how have you
and your family made ends meet? How have you been able to look after
yourselves and so on? --- I have been battling since, but my eldest son
was working at the mines at Harmony, but he was one of those retrenched.
And one son of mine was 19 years old, he was doing standard nine, but
because of the problems in the family he had to leave schooling, and then
he was employed in the army. He worked two years and then they were also
retrenched. He was the person helping me. He is now sick, he is at SANTA
Hospital because he is suffering from tuberculosis.

Do you receive any pension, or grant, or anything of that kind to help
you? --- I came to Bloemfontein after receiving my husband's blue card
money, and then I went to the Department of Manpower. They referred me to
the Commissioner at Botshabelo. They said I should tell him to help me
with the children. I have five children

	/who are

who are still schooling, and the other one is here next to me. I went to
the Commissioner and he wanted the children's reports from school, and
then he wanted my marriage certificate, and then I gave everything to
him. It took two years before I could get the money. I am presently
getting money for two children, but the other three I do not get anything
for them. I am working for a black person, and this person is helping me
a lot.

(Inaudible) ... information. I think at this stage I will hand back to
the Chairperson.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Are there any other questions from my ... (incomplete)

DR MGOJO: There's no time. I just want to know the name of the lawyer who
was handling the case when it was said that you had no lawyers. I think
that is important. --- I didn't even ask who the name of the attorney
was. He was a white attorney, and there was also a black attorney, and I
told them that I don't have any money, I don't have power, I cannot get
myself an attorney.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you very much, Mrs Tshale. It is a very, very difficult
thing to lose a husband and a father, and again we express and extend our
very deep sympathy to you both. Your husband was killed while he was
participating in a strike, and the fact that at that time people could be
killed while engaging on something like that tells us a lot about the
lack of freedom, the lack of individual and organisational freedom which
people were experiencing in the Free State in those days. Generally these
things - things like that don't happen today, and if they do, if the
police behave in that manner, they are far more likely to be punished
than they were in the past.

The Commission will examine the documents from the court case, and we
will investigate as to why the policemen that shot your husband were
acquitted, and we will convey that information to you. You have heard me
earlier on today, and you've heard Dr Borain speak about what the
Commission can offer to witnesses and victims who come before this
Commission, and you will know by now that we are not able to offer you
immediate assistance. We will examine your case and we will make
recommendations to the President and to the Cabinet, and they in turn
will give effect to those recommendations.

In the meantime we thank you again for coming here today and sharing your
story with us and the whole country, and we again hope that by the
telling of that story we hope that it in some way eases the burden that
you have had to carry. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, Sir.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: We thank you for being with us today, Mr Pistol. If we could
just arrange the equipment so that we can communicate properly. Are you
able to hear me now? Can you hear me talking to you?

MR PISTOL: Yes, I can hear you, Sir.

MR LYSTER: Thank you very much. Thank you very much for being with us
today. You have come from Thaba Nchu to tell your story. It relates to an
assault, a brutal assault upon you which took place in February 1990.
Before I ask you to give your evidence I would like you please to stand
and to take the oath. Please stand up. Thank you.

	---------------------

MR PISTOL (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mr Pistol. I am going to ask one of my colleagues,
Mrs Virginia Gcabashe, to assist you in the giving of your evidence. ---
I thank you, Sir.

MRS GCABASHE: I greet you, Mr Pistol. How are you this afternoon? --- We
are still fine under the grace of God. 	I want to first thank you for
appearing before us to give us exactly the kind of harassment you went
through. We know that sometimes when we speak it's as if we are now
bringing back the pains that actually went by, but because we want the
real truth we are supposed to go back a bit and ask people to tell us
their stories. Please indicate if you cannot hear me, because I will
raise my voice, and I will ask you also to raise your voice up so that we
can understand each other. It is indicated that you were born in January
in 1920. --- Yes, that's correct.

Can you please tell us a bit about your family background. Do you have
children, do you have a wife?

	/Tell us

Tell us that kind of information. --- Yes, I have children. Five of them
passed away. The ones that are left are married. They are staying in
different places. I am now staying with the grandchildren.

Do you still have a wife? --- Yes, I have a wife. We got married in a
church.

Are you referring to boys and girls? --- I have two boys.

Are they married? --- No, the two boys are not yet married. The other one
is still at school.

What is the other one doing? --- He is at home. He is not feeling very
well. He is now deaf, he cannot hear perfectly well, and this affected
him because he is also mentally disturbed.

And how many daughters do you have? --- I have three daughters, and all
of them are married. I am staying with a grandchild and another daughter.

In other words you have four daughters? --- Yes.

Can you briefly tell us about everything that you've put down on your
statement? --- My story is this. It was on a Sunday when T K Mopede had
come to Botshabelo. It was a Sunday. On that Sunday I didn't go to
church, and I went to listen to T K Mopede's speech with regard to us
being Dikwankwetla. When he had finished delivering his speech we went
back home. We dispersed, we went to our respective places. On our way
back apparently there were Comrades who were watching us. There were two
of us. As we were on the way home they came and they grabbed me by the
neck. I thought they were just joking, but when I looked I realised that
it was quite a group. There were children, boys and girls. They picked up
stones. They

	/were busy

were busy following us. We even went into another man's yard. The woman
there chased us out of the yard. We didn't even know the people. They
kept on harassing us. They even pelted us with stones. They pelted me
with a stone on my right shoulder because I was trying to protect the
gentleman with whom I was going. As I was doing that the stone hit me on
the ribs. I felt a terrible pain on the ribs. I tried to go on as if I
wasn't feeling any pain. I tried to fight back, but they were busy
pelting us with stones. At that time police appeared. They were driving
the big kombi. What surprised me was that they didn't come to where we
were, but they just went around the street, which meant they gave the
Comrades a chance to run away. They chased them and the Comrades ran
away. I had fallen down at that stage, and the person I was with had also
fallen down. I dusted myself off and I was taken by the people who know
me. I was taken home. When I got home I found that I wasn't feeling well,
I couldn't breathe properly. My grandson heard. He took me in his car to
the hospital. When I got to the hospital I spent a long time without
being attended to. By the time they came to me it was already in the
afternoon on that Sunday. Then they took me to the x-rays. They just gave
me tablets and said I must go home, they'll see what to do with me. I was
taken home. I slept at home. The following day I could not bear the pain.
I couldn't breathe properly. My shoulder was very painful. I came to
Bloemfontein to see Dr Smith. He is the one who tried to help me. Because
I did not have money I couldn't go back to be re-attended. Because of my
ribs that were broken Dr Smith told me that had I delayed I could have

	/died, but

died, but he helped me tremendously. So I went to him twice and I got
much help. I was supposed to have gone to him again but I could not
afford to, because my health isn't quite well. Thereafter we were called
to the offices in Botshabelo. When we got there we found that it was a
group of people. There were attorneys from Bloemfontein. We couldn't
discuss anything because the ANC members asked that this case be dropped,
and that the Dikwankwetla group shouldn't be assaulted. This matter ended
unresolved. Thereafter I got a letter that said I should go to Botshabelo
office. Then I went there. Then they asked me about this whole thing that
took place. I explained it to them. That's where I'll end.

Thank you, Mr Pistol. In order for us to clarify certain issues we'll ask
a few questions. You said in February 1990 that is the day on which you
were assaulted. You told us that we were next to Emmen, or you were close
to Emmen. That is a place. Just explain what sort of a place is Emmen.
--- That place where we were assaulted?

Yes, the place called Emmen. Just tell us more about it. --- They just
told me it's Emmen, but I wasn't aware, I didn't know it was Emmen.

Is it the name of the area? --- No, it's the name of the street. It
wasn't explained to me as to whether it was a place or what, because I
didn't know the place, but it's not very far. It's in the M Section, from
where Mopede was delivering his speech.

You said you were taken to the hospital at Universitas. Who took you to
the hospital? --- Yes, the hospital in Bloemfontein, Universitas. It was
another

	/boy that

boy that is my grandchild. He took me in his car and took me to the
hospital.

What's his name? --- The name of the son? The name of the grandson is
Thoko. It's Thoko. It's the son of my daughter.

You said when you were at the hospital they took you for x-ray tests. ---
Yes, they did.

Did they ever explain to you as to what were the results of the x-rays?
--- No, I was never told anything.

Were you given your records? --- They never gave me anything. They never
gave me the papers. Dr Smith asked me where they were. I told him that I
don't have any knowledge as to where they were. Dr Smith wanted to get
the doctor who was treating me, but I didn't know, I had no details, but
he was at the Botshabelo Hospital.

You said a Casspir arrived. Were there any people arrested amongst the
group? Were there any arrests made on that particular day? --- No, they
never arrested anyone. They didn't even make a follow-up, none whatsoever.

You said you went to Dr Smith. Do you have any report from Dr Smith that
he attended to you? --- I do have a report from Dr Smith. I do have them
at home. I even know where he stays.

If we would like you to give us those papers would you be able to do so?
--- Dr Smith is next to - opposite to Listen, where there is SANTA. There
is a house where he is having his surgery.

Do you have any letters or documentation? Do you have a report as to his
examination? --- Even if they

	/were there

were there probably the children had already thrown them away.

You said you were called to Botshabelo, you were called to where there
were attorneys. Who called you to this meeting? --- You mean the
attorneys meeting? I don't know who called us, because when we were
called on that day we just went there as a group. The attorneys were from
Bloemfontein. If there were not three, there were four or five. I don't
know any one of them, but they addressed this matter. That's where it
ended with these attorneys.

Were they talking about the assault by the youths? Were they addressing
you with regard to the assaults? --- Yes, they had come to address that
matter.

Thereafter what did they do for you? What did these attorneys do to help
you? --- Absolutely nothing. It just ended there, because they were
saying ANC had said that this matter must never ever happen again. That's
where it ended. They said they were requesting us - they were requesting
the ANC never ever to trouble people again, and that's where it must end.

In your statement you gave testimony about Nthako Vusi Johannes. You said
he's your witness. You said he's the one you were with when you got
assaulted. Is he still around if we would like to talk to him with regard
to this matter? --- I can't understand your question.

If we would like to speak to Johannes is there any way we can get hold of
him? --- Maybe you can get him. He is still around.

Mr Pistol, I thank you very much. I feel for you. You were a victim of
circumstances, but we hope that these 	/days are

days are now gone by. They belong to the past. I thank you very much.
I'll hand over to our Chairman.

	---------------------

MR DLAMINI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Babu Pistol, can I ask one or two
clarifying questions? What is the present relationship between
Dikwankwetla Party and the ANC? Do you still have harassment from the ANC
Comrades? --- Right now it seems as if they have actually subsided. They
are no longer as wild as before. It seems as if they have gone down. They
are not as violent as before, because at that time you couldn't even go
outside without requesting permission from them.

(Inaudible) ... or not that a culture of tolerance is developing in your
area, and we appreciate it, we hope it's going to continue on that note.
My second question. You made a request here from the Commission to help
you with - in order to be able to support your family. Can I check
whether you do get any State pension or grant? --- Yes, I do get some
pension money.

How much is it? --- It is R405,00. It's R405,00. I am not making a
mistake, it's R405,00. I get that at the bank in Thaba Nchu.

Thank you, Babu Pistol. Thank you.

	---------------------

You said that you have got two sons, one is mentally disturbed. Is he
getting any medical treatment? --- No, he is not under any medical
treatment. I took him to the doctor for quite a long time, but they
couldn't find anything wrong with him.

What is his name? --- He is Charlie Pistol.

	---------------------

	/Mr Pistol,

Mr Pistol, thank you very much for coming to tell us your story today. It
is a very sad thing that one of the

common themes that we have noticed during the course of listening to
evidence around this country is the deep lack of respect shown to elderly
people during the course of political conflict. One can explain this - or
one can analyse it and explain it to some extent by saying that as this
country moved towards political liberation many young people became angry
and frustrated at the unwillingness or the failure of some older people
to join in their struggle, but nevertheless it is very sad to hear about
an old person like yourself being beaten with iron bars merely for
attending a political rally.

We are fortunate now that we have a constitution and a police force to
protect our right to express ourselves freely, and we must work hard and
vigilantly at protecting the system that so many people have fought so
hard for.

You have said that you were assaulted by Comrades who belonged to the
ANC, and we've also heard evidence this morning from ANC members who were
beaten and killed by members of the party that you belong to, the
Dikwankwetla Party. Now, our job is not to lay blame, but our job is to
record the evidence and to analyse the evidence, and to note that it was
the political system that operated in this country at the time that
allowed these sorts of violations to take place, and to make
recommendations to the Government to ensure that these sorts of things
can never happen again.

So thank you again for coming and giving us your evidence. I feel sorry
for you, and I am sure there are many out here in the hall, and those
people who have

	/listened

listened to your evidence on the radio, who also feel sorry for you.
Thank you very much? --- Thank you very much, Sir.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: If you could just take a seat and put the earphones on, Mr
Motlale, and please confirm whether you can hear me while I am speaking.
Are you able to hear me well enough? Thank you very much for coming in
today. You are from Thaba Nchu, and you will tell us a story about what
happened to you in June 1984,. Before you tell your story please will you
stand so that you can take the oath.

	---------------------

SHUPING JOSIAH MOTLALE (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: I will be assisting you today in the leading of your evidence.
Your full name is Shuping Josiah Motlale, is that correct? --- Yes,
that's correct.

And you live in Zone Three in Thaba Nchu, is that right? --- That's
correct.

Now, this event that you will tell us about took place in Thaba Nchu in
June 1984, is that right? --- Yes, that's correct.

Can you just tell us briefly, at that time were you married, were you
living in Thaba Nchu? Tell us a little bit about your personal
background. --- I am married, and I am staying in Thaba Nchu. I am
working in Mafikeng.

(Inaudible) ... us about what happened to you in June 1984. I understand
at the time that you were a member of the Bophutatswana Police, is that
correct? --- Yes, that's correct.

Okay, thank you. Can you tell us what happened in June 1984? --- In June
1984 I was working in Mafikeng. I was in the Parliament. I received a
telegram from home which reported that my father - my brother had died. I
took this telegram and gave it to the sergeant with whom

	/I was

I was working because it was late. He released me and told me that he'll
report on my behalf that I had left, I must hurry home. I hurried home.
We didn't actually talk as to how many days I would take off. (Pause)

Sorry, I know that these are painful memories for you to go through
again, Mr Motlale, so just take your time in answering and just try and
relax. We're here to listen to your story in a supportive way and to
sympathise with you. --- Then I took 19 days so that I could be able to
prepare for the burial, go to insurance companies. When I went back to
Mafikeng I got there and I reported at the charge office that I was
present. I was told to go back to the Parliament. I was working at six in
the morning. When I got there at 6 o'clock in the morning to start my
duties two sergeants came in. At that time when they came they were
already insulting me, swearing at me, and they were telling me that I am
an informer and I am poor. I could not answer them. Until one of them
said they were going to arrest this dog. I didn't answer them. They took
me to the cells, they took out my uniform. That is when they told me that
they are going to search me for my cards, or ANC cards. I explained to
them that I was not a member of the ANC, I didn't even belong to any
political organisation, but they nevertheless arrested me. They kept me
in custody. Maybe they thought that I was going to give a statement and
explain to the Magistrate as to what was happening. On the very same day
of the arrest, round about 12 midnight, two sergeants arrived. It was
Mutsamayi and Marume. When they came they took me, they put me into the
back of the van, where there was a dog, and there was also a sack. They
made this sack wet

	/and they

and they started assaulting me with it until they took me back to the
charge office. When we got there they got out some electrocuting
equipment. They told me that I should tell them about all the other
organisations which were affiliated to the ANC. They told me I was an ANC
informer. It was on the very same week that Mangope was arrested. That
was when Metsing was going to sign a contract. I believe I stayed for two
weeks. I couldn't appear in court, I couldn't do anything. One evening
they came to me. Then during the day they would give me rice water. After
that two weeks my mother heard news that I had been arrested. (Pause)

Mr Motlale, we know that this is upsetting for you. You said your mother
had heard that you'd been arrested, and did she assist you in being
released from prison? --- I must tell you I don't have parents. It's
actually my sister who heard that I was arrested, and she went to
Mafikeng to search for me. When she arrived in Mafikeng she stayed in
Mafikeng searching for me for three consecutive days. (Pause) On the
fourth day they took her at about 6 o'clock in the afternoon and they
dropped her at Schweizer-Reineke River. They undressed her and they
assaulted her.

(Inaudible) ... policemen were, Mr Motlale? Were they members of the
Bophutatswana Police Force? --- These were my colleagues. I know them
perfectly well.

(Inaudible) ... after you've given your evidence. --- They undressed my
sister, they assaulted her, and they just left her there, they came back.
After two weeks I appeared before the Court and I was given - I was
sentenced to 15 days or R15,00. There was another chap

	/from the

from the ANC who was arrested, and he said, "You don't have to pay this.
When you receive a card on your release you must come to us, we'll assist
you." Those 15 days were reduced to 12 days, and I managed to come home.
But I went back to my work. I told them to give me money, to give me my
salary, because I wasn't working for them now. They didn't give me
anything. When I tried to talk to them they said I should go and get
everything from Mandela because I was his informer in Bophutatswana. I
didn't have any place to sleep, I didn't have food to eat, until one
person felt sorry for me and he gave me money until I reached my home.
Even when I was here they kept on promising me that they would arrest me.
At one stage I went to Mafikeng to ask them whether can they give me
anything. They said no up to this day.

Sorry, can you - are you indicating that your ear phones are not working?
Can you hear me? --- I can hear you.

Is that the end of your - sorry, can you not hear me? --- I am requesting
- because I didn't get anything from them. I am not working. I get lifts
when I have to go to Mafikeng.

Mr Motlale, were you discharged from the defence force when you were
sentenced? We you dismissed? Sorry, not the defence force, the police
force. Were you dismissed from the police force? Did you get a letter
informing you that you were dismissed? --- They took me to the head
office in Mafikeng and I was then told that I am dismissed.

Did they give you reasons? --- No, they didn't give me any reason
whatsoever.

	/But when

But when they were beating you and assaulting you and torturing you did
they say that you were an informer? I think that's what I understood you
to say. --- Yes, that's what they said.

Do you have any idea why they said that, why they should have said that?
--- This happened because I was at home when Mangope was arrested and
taken to the stadium. I was at home. Now, they thought that I went home
to inform the ANC people what was happening in Bophutatswana.

(Inaudible) ... at home assisting with the burial of your brother. ---
That's correct, Sir.

Have you been employed since then? --- No, I have never been employed
because I am now sick.

What sickness do you have? --- I think the electrocution has affected me,
because I even had an operation.

(Inaudible) ... that they got some electrical equipment. You didn't tell
us what they did with it. What did they do to you? You said that they
tortured you by means of hitting you with a wet sack, but you didn't tell
us what they did with the electrical equipment. Can you tell us? --- They
broke my finger, two fingers on both hands. These fingers are not
working. And here my private parts are not working perfectly well. I even
have a hole on my thigh.

(Inaudible) ... electrical equipment, electrical torture equipment. ---
Yes, that's where they applied the electric equipment.

And did you make a statement to any other police about this? Did you lay
charges of assault? Did you do

	/anything

anything about it at the time? --- I couldn't go to any policemen during
those years because Bophutatswana was still oppressing the people.

At which hospital were you treated for your injuries? --- I went to
Maroka Hospital.

Mr Motlale, at this stage I'll ask my colleagues if they wish to ask any
questions.

	---------------------

In your statement you said that you were arrested because they felt that
you went ... (incomplete - end of Side A, Tape 8) ... says that you did
inform - get a permission from Sergeant Motsibe to go home for the burial
of your brother. Did you go to the sergeant who had given you permission
to ask him to rectify this suspicion, because he knew that you had gone
to bury your brother? --- When these people were harassing me like this I
couldn't meet him at all, and I didn't see him.

Did he know that you were expelled because it was said that you had gone
home because you had gone to be an informer? --- I can say he knows,
because I sent people to him but he never came.

He never came. Can you give us the date of your arrest? --- I can't
remember the date very well. It was on a Saturday if I still remember.

(Inaudible) ... the month of June. --- Yes, it was still in the June
month.

Thank you.

	---------------------

Mr Motlale, did your sister make any statement to the police? Did she lay
any charges as far as you know? --- When she arrived at Wesselsbron she
went to the

	/police

police station, trying to lay a charge against the policemen, and they
asked her where will they get those policemen if she doesn't know them.

Where is your sister living at this time? --- She is married in Botswana
at this present moment.

It would be very useful if you could request her to get in touch with us
to also make a statement relating to what happened to her if that's
possible. --- I don't know whether will she receive the post quickly,
because they don't have any telephones in the area they are situated.
I'll have to write her a letter, and then they take three weeks to reach
them.

It doesn't matter. We're still going to - the Commission is still going
to be working for many, many months to come, and it would be useful to
supplement the evidence that you have given by her evidence as well. So
if you feel that you can do that it would be useful for us if you could
write to her and ask her to make a statement. --- I will do so, Sir.

Yes, one of my colleagues has mentioned that she can do it through the
embassy in Gabarone if she wants to make a statement there, if you can
inform her of that, in Botswana. Thank you very much for coming to see us
today to tell us your story. We will follow up this story. If you are
able to give names of the people who assaulted you and assaulted your
sister to our staff, who are down below where you were sitting, so that
we can add to the statement that you made to us some weeks ago in
Bloemfontein. That will certainly be very useful for us. We will try and
follow up to see why that took place, and to confront the people who were
responsible for that.

	/And, as

And, as I've said, it will be useful to have the statement of your sister.

The role of the police in this country has - in our country's history has
always been a very controversial role. Instead of protecting the rights
of all citizens, and upholding those rights, in the past the police in
reality served the interests of only one political group, and this of
course was made more difficult by the fact that they created - the
Government created lots more police forces in the various homelands which
were created at that time, and you worked for one of those homeland
governments, one of those homeland police forces. And what happened to
you at that time should never ever have happened, and we now have a
constitution and a police force which will ensure that those sorts of
things do not happen ever again and, as I said earlier on, we must all
work hard and vigilantly to uphold those rights, which so many people
have fought for.

We express our deep sympathy for you at the terrible things that happened
to you, and the injuries that you received. We will do our best to get to
the bottom of what you have told us. As you have probably heard me and Dr
Borain say today, we cannot offer you any immediate assistance. Our job
is to make recommendations to the President and to the Cabinet, and they
in turn will make recommendations to Parliament to put their policies and
their recommendations into effect.

So we thank you again very much for coming today, and we wish you well.
Thank you very much.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you for coming in today, Mr Molatseli. Could you please
put on the earphones which you see in front of you. Can you hear me? Are
you able to hear me well enough?

MR MOLATSELI: I can hear you.

MR LYSTER: Thank you very much. You have come to us today from the
Tweefontein area, where you live, which is near ... (intervention)

MR MOLATSELI: A little louder please.

MR LYSTER: Sorry, I'll speak a little louder. You've come to us today
from Thaba Nchu, where you live, and you've come to tell us about
harassment, torture and detention which you suffered in 1978. Before you
give your evidence I'll ask you to stand to please take the oath. Could
you stand up and take the oath. Is that better now? Can you hear me
clearer now? Are you able to hear me? If the briefer can just indicate
whether she can hear me. Okay. Could you please fit the earphones again,
Mr Molatseli, and tell me whether you can now hear me.

MR MOLATSELI: Yes, I can hear you.

MR LYSTER: That's good. Can you stand up please.

	---------------------

MR E MOLATSELI (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mr Molatseli, you can sit down, and I am going to
ask my colleague, Mr Dlamini, to assist you with your evidence today.
Thank you, Mr Dlamini.

MR DLAMINI: Good afternoon, Mr Molatseli. --- Good afternoon, Sir.

Can I confirm if I've got the right person? The person that we are
supposed to hear was born on the 18th of August 1914, and you look very
much younger than that.

	/--- Yes,

--- Yes, you are talking to me.

Can I confirm that you are 82 years of age? --- Yes, I am 82, but they've
made a mistake, they've added three more years.

Thank you. We really appreciate your presence here, and the time that
have accorded us, and ... (intervention)

Can you repeat that, Sir? --- We really appreciate your presence this
afternoon, and thank you very much for the time you have given us. Can I
ask you to start by telling us about your family. Is Mrs Molatseli still
there, and the children, what they are doing? --- Mrs Molatseli is still
alive. My wife is still alive. I have two sons. Can I carry on?

Yes, tell us more. We are interested. --- I have two sons. The other one
is in Transvaal. He is now married and he is a teacher at a school, in a
high School at Sebokeng. And the other one was at Vista University, and
he completed his degree this year. He is now working.

May I know again whether Mrs Molatseli is present here? --- She is not
here, she is at home. She is at home, she is not here with us.

Can you please convey our regards to her. --- I will do so, Sir.

Thank you. Can I now get into the incident that took place in 1978, which
is one of the sad and unfortunate parts of the past history of our
country, where at your age you were harassed the manner you were. Would
you please tell us what happened and what were the reasons for the
experience that you incurred on that particular day? --- Please bear with
me. I am a bit deaf. A policeman that I have indicated in my statement

	/injured my

injured my ears and I cannot hear perfectly well. Do you hear me, because
I can't hear myself?

Yes, I can hear you. --- I think you heard me when I told you that my
ears are a bit affected now. It was early in the morning in April in 1978
and I was on my way. Just before the sun could rise I was on my way to
school, and I heard a knock at my door. When I opened the door I
discovered that it was two policemen, and they pushed themselves into the
room that I was staying in at Selosesha. I was a principal at a place
called Kroondraai. The people that are at Botshabelo presently were first
living in Kroondraai. I had a few teachers assisting me. Those were the
people who sacrificed a lot. I was staying in Selosesha and I had a small
room. My original home is far. It's about 40 miles from Tweefontein to
that place. Now, every morning I would be preparing myself to go to
school. On that particular morning the police came in and they wanted my
identity document. I gave them and they started searching the house, and
they found a book called, "Up from Slavery," that was written by T
Washington, who was a principal at Etuski College(?). They took that book
and they said, "Get out of this house because you are a terrorist. You
are teaching at a Kroondraai school. What are you teaching those
children? Are you teaching them terrorism?" And they were behind me,
coming - you know, pushing me, and they pushed me into a big lorry that
was parked there. I found many people in that truck, and they took me to
Selosesha Charge Office. I was accompanied by one policeman to the charge
office, and he said to the other policemen there, "This is a person who
has been

	/"teaching

teaching young pupils politics at Kroondraai." They showed me a place to
sit, and then I sat there the whole day. I didn't know why did they pick
me up. I didn't even realise that the book, "Up from Slavery," was such a
bad thing to be arrested for. When the sun sets the police released me,
they said, "Go, but tomorrow you have to be here at 8 o'clock." I left
the charge office. They gave me my keys and my identity document, but
they kept the book with them. The next morning before 8 o'clock I was at
the charge office, and they said to me, "We are taking you, we are going
to your place now," the place that I have referred to which is 40
kilometres from Selosesha. The police said, "You terrorist, we are taking
you to your house, we are going to search." We drove until we reached my
place. When we arrived there my wife was not at home, she went to the
church meeting. Now, the person who was at home gave us the permission to
get in. It was a police officer and two other policemen. They searched
the house. Together with our officer we were sitting in the lounge, but
there was another room in which my two sons slept. The other one was
attending Fort Hare University, and the other one was at Jordan High in
Sebokeng. And they came out with something from that room. They said,
"Look at this." They had Steve Biko's portrait. His hands were
handcuffed. His hands were handcuffed, and they showed me the picture,
they said, "Look at this. It's from inside your house." I said to them,
"I am from Thaba Nchu. My two sons sleep in that room. The other one is
at Jordan High School, the other one is at Fort Hare. You picked me up at
my small shack from Thaba Nchu and you pushed me with your rifles, and

	/you are

you are here to tell me that I know this Steve Biko photo." It was even
my first time to hear the name Steve Biko. They showed me that photo with
his hands handcuffed. That photo was taken from the room where my two
sons were sleeping, and I said to them, "That is my sons' room." They
asked me, "Which son? Which son can we associate with this photo?" I
said, "I don't know." And they took one of his photos, they asked me,
"Who is this person the photo?" I said, "It's my son, and he is at Fort
Hare University." They took that photo. Up to this day I have never
received that photo. And they said, "This Steve Biko's photo, it's a very
dirty photo that we got into your house." I was escorted. I want to thank
God because my wife was not at home, and she doesn't want anything to do
with such situations. You know, I was like a criminal. I was escorted
into her house. I don't know what could have happened if she was there. I
thank God she wasn't there. They took the photo, the Steve Biko photo
with his hands handcuffed, and they took one of my son's photos. They
said, "This photo must belong to one of your two sons," and I said to
them, "I do not know whose photo is that." The third point that they
indicated was very bad. The Secretary to the Bantu Education, that's
where I complained. It was a letter because I was complaining. It was
just a copy of the letter I wrote, and they had this copy with them. They
said those were the three items that they found unacceptable in my house,
Steve Biko's photo, the letter that I wrote to the Secretary of Bantu
Education complaining. I was asking him to intervene. I was asking him to
see how the parents were involved because they built a school, but I was

	/chased

chased away because I was a Sotho person, and I was told

to go to the other Sotho-speaking people. Now, those three things led to
the police thinking that I was a criminal. And that book, "Up from
Slavery," because I was then painted a terrorist. Their senior asked me
what I did want at Komdraai, because I was a member of Dikwankwetla. I
said to them, "You can inquire from any political organisation. I have
never been a member because I know the Sotho-speaking people do not
involve themselves in politics." But I told them that, "When you took a
different direction from the Sotho people they would kill you because
they would disagree with you." They wanted to know about my presence at
Komdraai. I told them, "You took the letter that I sent to Pretoria." I
want to tell you that I taught - I taught children and I taught teachers.
I don't know what to say, but some of them are very successful people. I
was telling you that we came back to Thaba Nchu, and when we arrived at
the charge office I was told that the three items that were found at my
house were really bad. They told me that the next morning ... (inaudible
- witness now speaking Sotho and English) ... not later than 8 o'clock in
the morning, and not later than 6 o'clock in the afternoon, every day
until further notice. That was the instruction I got from those people.
If you fail to do that, I was told ... (inaudible) ... and banish you
from Thaba Nchu. And they told me that my children will never see me
again if I can't report ... (inaudible) ... o'clock in the afternoon
every day, through all kinds of weather. It doesn't matter whether it's
raining or what is happening, but you have to be there. And I did just
that. I am now telling

	/you the

you the most disturbing thing. The following day ...

(inaudible) ... not later than 8 o'clock. I still remember very well. 20
to eight I was standing in front of that office. And the man who was
supposed to open came a little late, and when he opened he opened the
door and he got into the room. I followed him ... (inaudible) ... time
lock or some register to show that I was there. I said nothing. Then I
waited there. I have been standing here not knowing what to do. The
children at school were waiting for their teacher, because I had to give
them lessons. While I was waiting there - I waited there for about 30
minutes, not knowing what to do. I didn't know what to do, because they
told me that I should be here, and I was expecting them to give me a
register to sign so that I can leave. I will tell you the name if you
want, but this policeman was there on his own, and he said to me - and he
asked me a question all of a sudden. He said, "Yesterday ... (inaudible)
... I was shocked. I said I am faced here with a difficult person ...
(inaudible) ... insulting, humiliating questions. I ignored him totally.
I had nothing to do with him. I found that this is not my class.

MR LYSTER: Can we have order please?

MR DLAMINI: Yes, Babu Molatseli, we know that those are memories that you
wouldn't like to recall. Thank you. --- I can't remember where did I end.
Now this person, when he realised that I was ignoring him he started
hitting me with his fists, and he was a hefty person and I fell. My head
was swollen. This table was full of my blood, and my clothes were full of
blood. The jacket that I had on that day, and my shirt, everything was
full of

	blood as

blood as if a cow has been slaughtered. You know, the floor was full of
blood ... (inaudible) ... a lot of soap or whatever they use to scrub the
blood out. The whole office was simply full of my blood. I didn't provoke
this man in any way, I just kept my peace. I just kept quiet. I said not
a single word, but he just found it ... (inaudible) ... or whatever that
people who keep quiet they teach them in that type of way. That's how
they teach them. They will teach you how to talk here in ... (inaudible)
... now after all that, when the chief officer arrived, really I was -
you know, I cried like a little boy, like a child, asking for help when I
was reeling round on the ground, unable to stand up because of my knee.
And I stood up and tried to support myself. I did at long last manage to
steady my legs and to stand. And then the chief most fortunately arrived,
and was shocked and said, "What is happening?" He asked him. He never
answered. And then he asked me, and I pointed at home, I didn't talk. And
I still remember what that man said. I respect him for that phrase. He
said, "Man, you are not a Magistrate," and I turned and I said to the
man, to the office, "Please let me go to my wife, because my children are
not here, and I want to show them that what you are doing to me." He
said, "The people of Komdraai have asked me to go and teach there,
because the School Board of Thaba Nchu have sacked me, and my children -
one is at Fort Hare, the other one is at Jordan High. I have no money to
pay for the fees. Now, please go to Komdraai so that they can pay you
something. Now I want to go and show him that you say - which this
policeman of yours what he have done to me. That's what you do when
people come

	/"and look

"and look for work." And he said no. And then at the same time my face
was swelling up, you know. It was terrible.

Those who saw me really ran away at the hospital. Then I was bleeding
from my noose, I mean through my nose, through my ears, all over. My
whole face was bruised and bleeding, and I was not steady on my legs, I
didn't know - I looked terrible. Then he simply ordered a police van to
take me to the hospital. I was taken to the hospital, rushed there,
because they were too frightened. I was bleeding. The bleeding had to
stop. They couldn't do it, and I was taken there. When I got to the
hospital many people thought I was dead because I was just punch drunk. I
just didn't do anything. And you know what happened to me at the
hospital? Nothing. I arrived there in the morning, and was fetched by the
police at sundown. Not a single nurse saw me, not a single doctor
attended to me, and I was taken back to the police station. At the police
station just - it was just - the whole thing was just a mess. I was told
to go home. Nobody had time for me there. "Just go home." I went to
Selosesha. You know about Selosesha at that time, a tsotsi infested
place, limping, punch drunk, hardly knowing what I am doing. And so far
really I don't know if you have made any sense with my scattered remarks.
I just don't know how far I've gone.

You have made a lot of sense, Babu Molatseli. I am now interested in the
... (intervention) --- Let me just make a correction there. My name is
Molatseli, M-o-l-a-t-s-e-l-i.

Thank you for that, Babu Molatseli. --- I beg

	/your pardon,

your pardon, yes.

Babu Molatseli, the person who did this to you, is it the same Abraham
Ohane who is reflected in your

statement? Can I confirm? --- Yes, that's the same person.	

Secondly, which court did the case go through? --- We went to Thaba Nchu
Magistrate's Court at Selosesha.

At the time when the police were interrogating you you denied belonging
to any political party. It wasn't safe at that time. Can I confirm are
you a member of any political party now? --- I will never have to do with
anything with that.

Thank you. Can I also ... (intervention) --- I you mention politics to me
I have nothing to do with you. Just go away.

Thank you very much, Dada. Can I also confirm, one of your requests to
the Commission is to be helped with the hearing aids. The Commission has
noted that. The Chairman will refer to it when he summarises. Secondly,
you also made a request that you would wish to meet the perpetrator so
that he can explain to you why he did what he did to you, and that has
also been noted. The Chairman will refer to it when he summarises. Thank
you very much Mr Molatseli for sharing with us. I know it's a painful and
humiliating experience, but the manner you have shared with us we have
all learned from it, and we are a lot wiser than we were before it. Thank
you. Can I now hand over to the Chairman.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you very much for coming in today and telling us your
story. It was a very coherent story,

	/contrary

contrary to what you believe. They were not scattered remarks at all, it
was a very coherent story, and a very sad one. And it's a story which
tells us a lot about the

previous government in this country. You had in your house a very famous
book by Booker T Washington ... (intervention) --- I am listening to you,
Sir.

... "Up from Slavery," and you also had a picture of Steve Biko's hands
in handcuffs, and these two items created such fear and insecurity in the
police that they detained you, they subjected you to assaults, and they
made you report daily to the police station for a period of months, and
they accused you of propagating politics in your school. And that's very
sad, and as I've said before hopefully we now have a police force where
that sort of thing, that sort of interference with private citizens, can
never ever happen again, and we have to work hard at protecting the
system which we now have in place.

As my colleagues have mentioned to you we will try and assist you insofar
as the impairment of your hearing is concerned. We have, since we have
been in Bloemfontein, entered into an arrangement with the Ministry of
Health in Bloemfontein, and they have undertaken to assist people who
require urgent treatment arising out of injuries and assaults that they
received arising out of incidents which took place under the scope of the
Commission, so we can refer you to somebody in the Ministry of Health who
may be able to assist you.

But we thank you very much for coming here and sharing your story with
us, and we wish you and your wife well. --- I want to thank you, Sir.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you both for coming in today. Please will you confirm
that you can hear me through the earphones. Can you hear my voice? And
are you both going to be giving evidence, or will just one of you be
talking today? Both of you will be giving evidence, and you will be
giving evidence together about an incident which took place in June 1990
in Botshabelo township, and it relates to an assault upon you both by the
police. And you will be giving evidence together because you - this thing
happened at the same time. Before we proceed could you stand and take the
oath please.

	---------------------

SHADRACK RATABA and JONAS MOLEHE (Sworn, State)

MR LYSTER: I am going to ask one of my colleagues, Dr Magwaza, in the
leading of your evidence. Have you decided which one of you will be
talking first? You are Mr Rataba? --- I am Mr Molehe.

Mr Molehe. Okay, thank you very much. Dr Magwaza.

DR MAGWAZA: You are still very young. I can't help feeling that at a very
tender age you were subject to gross abuse, and such violation will leave
scars, or has left scars that will take a long time to heal. We are here
today to listen to your story, to acknowledge your pain, and to give you
support. You can begin to tell us your story. Probably, Jonas, you can
begin by telling us more about yourself. --- I am Jonas Molehe. I am the
son Mr Molehe, who was a teacher in Botshabelo. At this moment he is on
pension.

At the time when this incident happened did you belong to any political
party? What standard of education were you doing at school? --- In 1990 I
was doing

	/standard

standard nine. I was just a supporter of the ANC, but I had an
organisation at my heart which is the South African Communist Party. Now
what happened in that year, in 1990, we were a group of youths, and then
we formed a gospel group. It happened that one evening while we were
still at the practice - I think you must be aware that every group has a
constitution. We were both girls and boys singing in this choir. And then
every time we would meet our parents to brief them about the activities
of this gospel group, and the parents would give us advices so that we
cannot just be misled. While we were still at Retsamagile School(?) we
saw police coming in. There were two guys who used to pester with girls
every day. One day at 5 o'clock from the practice these two guys were
waiting at the gate, and they had knives with them, and they had another
sort of weapon in their hand. And they said, "We want a girl." We told
them we are not going to allow any member from our group to go out with
boys because we have to escort them until they are home, and then they
can leave their homes on their own. They attacked us, these two
gentlemen, but because we outnumbered them they tried to run away. We
chased them and we managed to get one of them, and this one was involved
in - he was supporting this other gentleman who wanted a girl. We didn't
have any dangerous weapons, we were bare-handed. We grabbed him and then
he - our aim was to take him to our parents, because he also stayed in
our area, so we wanted the parents to ask him why did he support his
friend. We caught him at a place between Section C and Section W. Now,
while we were passing a place called Simpowani - it was past seven to
six, and then we heard a Hippo coming

	/behind.

behind. And we did not run because we knew we were innocent because we
only had this person in our company, we wanted to take him to the parents
so that the parents can talk to him. The police arrived and they stopped.
When they got out of their car they were pointing their guns at us. They
asked what happened. We explained everything to them. They insulted us.
They said, "You Comrades, you've decided to take our jobs now. We are
going to show you," and they threw us into the Hippo. We were so many,
but we could all fit into the Hippo. On our way we were trying to explain
to them what happened, but they assaulted us. They let us put our hands
on the chair, and they took an empty bottle of cool drink and they
started hitting us on the fingers. They had bottles of beer in the Hippo
and they were drinking. They took us to Section H. The policemen on duty
would take turns hitting us. We drove with them until we went to the
police station at Botshabelo C Section. The Hippo stopped. They couldn't
let us out of the Hippo as normal people. They escorted us and they took
their guns and they hit us with the back of their guns. They took us into
the police station, and we thought that they would take us to the cells.
No, they didn't take us to the cells, but they took us to a room called
Room 13 ... (incomplete - end of Side B, Tape 8) ... to assault us. While
standing against a wall they would pull us. They continually assaulted
us, tramping on our bodies, and they were insulting us, telling us that
our mothers are bitches and they will only feel where they are asleep
that we are in trouble. They took something and they started assaulting
us with that. When we tried to stop they would

	/use their

use their heels to trample your hands, and I felt that it was so heavy on
me. They would let us stand up, and took our penis from behind and they
would hit us with something, and we couldn't identify. You can imagine
yourself, you don't see this person assaulting you. I was clever enough
to take a look at them, and at one stage they decided to take a look at
us, and two of the policemen were assaulting us. It was a violent area,
and they have been evicted from their houses, and I told them, I said,
"Please, can you please take me home because I am not feeling well." It
was to 12 in the evening, and I said to them, "Take me home so that I can
take my medication." I continually asked them, but they refused. But one
of their surgeons came and said, "Take this gentleman home so that he can
take his medication." They first took rounds in the township, and while
doing that they were continually beating me, and they didn't want to
listen to anything I was trying to tell them. It was at night and I
couldn't identify the section. We drove past Simpowani again until we
reached our section. You know, I wanted to run away. I said to myself,
"Should they make mistake I am going to run away," but one of them said,
"If you can try to run away we are going to shoot you." We had a dog at
home, and I fluted so that my dog could realise it was me, and I got into
the house, I took my tablets. They escorted me, but I could manage to
write down a note. And I said to them, "Gentlemen, there is a key that my
sister puts here," and I knew that my sister wakes up very early in the
morning, and I took the key that I had with me, I put it on top of the
note and I left it there. When I arrived at the police station my friends

	/were so

were so badly assaulted. I remember one old man who was in our company.
He wasn't actually our group member, but they hit him until he urinated
on himself. Some of our officials from the choir were not arrested, and
they managed to go home to report to our parents that we had been
arrested. They went to the school to fetch my father. He went together
with them to the police station, and we were told that we would write
statements. My hand was so swollen, and I said to them, "Look what you
have done to me." They said, "We don't take care." We opened a case at
the police station at Botshabelo, but we don't know what happened to
those charges we laid.

(Inaudible) ... it's very, very sad. I have just a few other questions to
ask. This group, the gospel group, it was purely a gospel group? Was it a
group that had a specific political affiliation? Did you all feel the
same about politics or about an organisation? --- No, we never had any
intention of politics, we were just a singing group, because I remember
well we even went to the studio to record some few cassettes.

At that time what was happening in the township? Why there were Casspirs
moving around? What was happening? --- It was that violent area. It was a
conflict between the ANC and the Dikwankwetla Party.

When you went to the police station you said you did have an opportunity
to see the police. Can you identify them? Do you know who they were? ---
I know their full names because the same night there was a person who was
arrested with us, and one policeman said to the other policeman, "Come
and see. Here is Chaka." I know Chaka and Mazibuko.

	/Do you

Do you know where they are now? Are they still police, are they still
acting as policemen? --- Yes, they are still working. The other one is
working at the police station at the industrial area, and the other one
is at the Section C Police Station.

And what you also said, you said the charge was laid against these
policemen. What happened? --- Yes, that's true, we laid a charge.

What happened? --- I couldn't write my exams. I have to start by saying I
was taken to Botshabelo Hospital, and I was transferred to Philonomi
Hospital, where I was operated. And when I was released I went back home
and we laid a charge, and we were told that we will go to a parade to
identify them, but that didn't take place. Because, you know, I would go
to school because I was so fond of schooling. I couldn't write anything.
My friend used to take notes for me. The CIDs would come and they would
tell us, "Let's go because the people are now there. Let's go and
identify them," but every time we would be at the police station we would
be told to go back home because the people are not there. If I remember
well it was in '91 when we were called, and then we tried to identify the
policemen we thought assaulted us, but this other one, Mazibuko, we
managed to identify. But we told them that Chaka was there and they said,
"Okay, that's fine. We know of Chaka."

Which police station did you report your case? --- It was at Botshabelo
Police Station.

(Inaudible) ... the name of the person who was dealing with the case? ---
It was Mr Mathobisa. He was transferred to Bloemfontein.

	/You also

You also mentioned something about the fact that you had a lawyer who was
acting on your behalf, but you said he was a bit reluctant. What do you
mean? --- My father came with a lawyer, I think it was Cooper & Son, and
together with my father we went to that firm, and then they referred us
to a Mr Venter. We gave him the statement and I gave them everything, the
particulars, and he said to me - he said everything that the police say
to me I should take it to them, but I couldn't because I didn't have
money to be coming to Bloemfontein every time, and I wanted to continue
with my studies.

Those lawyers, are they still around? --- I can't remember.

Well, regarding your treatment you mentioned that you had your hand
operated, and that that interfered with your schooling. Did you stop
schooling after the operation? --- In 1990 I was doing standard nine. The
year after that Mr Sajake, who was the school principal and the school
committee, decided that I should go to standard 10 because they knew my
performance. And they decided that I should go to the next standard. I
tried to keep up, but I couldn't, because even my methods of studies have
changed, I couldn't concentrate any more, because I would feel terrible
headaches and I would be attacked by the veins(?).

Do you still feel that way now? Do you still have those headaches? ---
Yes. Every time when I get disturbed the headaches come back.

Do you have any hospital records about your operation? --- Yes. Philonomi
Hospital have my records.

	/You also

You also mentioned that when you were detained in the police station you
had to go home to take your medication. What medication, what was it all
about? --- The way we were being assaulted I wasn't in a position to bear
the assault any more. Even animals are not punished that way. A friend of
mine was also there. At this moment he's in Welkom. You know, we wanted a
plan, you know, so that they can stop the assault for a time being.

Tell me, Jonas, what do you do now? --- I am not staying at home now, I
have my own house, and I am an upholsterer. I have a person that I stay
with, and we have a child, and I am not working. That is the kind of work
that I am doing.

Okay, thank you very much, Jonas. That's quite a very difficult situation
you are in.

	---------------------

DR MAGWAZA: Shadrack, if you could just tell me more about yourself. I
have heard most of the story from Jonas, then I will just ask you a few
questions. --- Shall I start from the beginning?

(Inaudible) ... you are, your age, your family, and also your political
affiliation if there is any. --- I am the son to Mrs Disebo Rataba,
Madisebo Rataba. My father passed away. We are 10 at home. I am the
eighth child. I am one of the persons who also got injured, or who got
involved with what happened to Mr Molehe. As he has already indicated I
was belonging to the ANC, and I was a supporter thereof. I was in this
gospel group when the two gentlemen came, and they wanted a girl, because
she was going out with one of those two gentlemen. And we refused because
we had - we had a rule. We didn't allow

	/anybody

anybody - we didn't allow a girl or a boy to attend to his private
matters during the practice. Now, these two boys arrived and they were
armed. They were in a fighting spirit. And then we chased them until we
were between the W Section and J Section, and we caught them just in the
middle. We actually caught the innocent guy, because he was invited by
his friend to come and fight us. We left with this gentleman to the J
Section. There's a place called Simporoneng. There's a factory called
Rubex there, and a Hippo approached us. And the police didn't ask
anything. They just picked us up, they said, "Comrades," and they pushed
us into the Hippo. That's where we felt the pain. That's where we felt
the pain, because they didn't want to listen to our story. I remember
there was a cool drink bottle, and they used that to hit us on our backs.
They continued assaulting us. That was a group doing a night shift. When
we arrived at Section H there was a new shift coming in. This outgoing
team told them, "A group of Comrades belonging to Satan is here." It was
after eight, I remember well. We left. From H we went to Botshabelo
Police Station, and they had already started assaulting us. They first
got out of the Hippo and they formed sort of a guard of honour, and when
we got out of the Hippo we had to pass through each one of them, and we
didn't know where they were taking us to, we just saw ourselves in an
office. When we were in that office they said we should raise our hands,
we don't have to look them in the face. It was cold, it was in June. I
remember very well they pulled us with our ankles and we could - then we
fell. And every time you use your hands to protect yourself they would
say, "Come on, start afresh."

	/And when

And when they do this the second time, you know, the cement was so cold.
They ran, they trampled on us with their boots, and they would - and they
said we were clean, they wanted to make us dirty. They used broomsticks.
The first one broke, the second one broke, and they were busy trampling
on us. If you tried to turn your head to take a look at them they would
use their boot so that you can face down. When the second broomstick
broke they took a plank, because the policeman used his two hands to
handle this, and they would give us a hiding.

(Inaudible) ... no, I think you went through a very horrendous. If you
could just tell us exactly, with all this brutality what - did you have
any physical injuries? What happened? --- This thing affected me and it
still affects me, and my body is sore at all times. Especially in winter
I could feel pains. When it's summer I get tired. When I wake up in the
morning I am already tired and I cannot think, because my mother doesn't
have money to take me for treatment, and I thought now I am disabled.

You have never had any treatment at all? --- No, not treatment, no
treatment at all.

(Inaudible) ... identify these people who did this to you? --- I know two
of them, Chaka and Mazibuko. These were the two gentlemen whom we
identified.

You also - you also had a charge against them in the same way as Jonas?
--- Yes, we laid charges against them.

You had the same lawyer? --- This one's father sought a lawyer for him,
but we didn't find any lawyer.

(Inaudible) ... now? You are still very, very young. --- I went back to
school, because I left

	/school

school earlier on and my parents said, "Please go back to school."

(Inaudible) ... to school? What standard of education? --- Standard 10.

Standard 10. Okay, thanks very much, Shadrack. Thanks very, very much for
your story. I would like to hand it over to our Chairperson now.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Dr Magwaza. Are there any questions that anyone
else would like to ask? Thank you both very much for coming here today
and telling us your story. I made some remarks earlier on today about the
police force and the role that the police force played in our country
over the last - over the past years. And the defence force has also
played a very negative role in our country, and it was used to support
the work of the police, and to harass and assault people who opposed the
policies of the Government, and this should never have been allowed to
happen, and we must guard against that sort of thing ever happening again.

And it's very ironic that in two short years the defence force has
changed from being the sort of organisation that you have described, it
has changed, transformed into the sort of organisation which by and large
is playing a role in protecting and preserving our new democracy here. We
from KwaZulu-Natal have recently had our local government elections, and
it was stated in the paper after those elections went off successfully
that the defence force played a very, very crucial role in ensuring that
violence did not happen, so we are certainly very glad that the defence
force has managed to start

	/transforming

transforming itself from the organisation it was when you were detained
and assaulted, to the sort of organisation that it is now.

We will try and investigate what happened to the cases that you initiated
against the people who assaulted you, and we will try and find out who
was responsible and why those things happened. We will also make
recommendations to the State President concerning assistance to people
like yourselves who have suffered injuries as a result of human rights
violations.

So again that you very much for coming in, thank you for being patient.
You've waited a long time to give your evidence today, and we hope that
by the telling of your story in public that you feel that you have lifted
in some way some of the burden which you have been carrying for these
years. Thank you very much.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you very much for coming in today, Mr Bolane. Can you
hear me through the earphones? Are you able to hear me? Thank you. Thank
you for being patient. You are the last person who will give evidence
today, and you've waited the entire day, and we thank you for that. You
will be telling us a story relating to what occurred to you as an ANC
member in exile, and it's a story which took place over a number of
years, five or six years. We don't expect you to relate every incident in
any detail. You have, as you are aware, given us a detailed statement. It
is late in the day, and there are witnesses who have to travel a long
time to get home. We certainly don't want to rush you through your
evidence, but because yours took place over a long period of time we'd
like you to try and highlight the most important incidents - highlight
those incidents which you feel are the most important that you'd like to
tell us. I am going to - before you give your evidence I am going to ask
you to please stand and take the oath.

	---------------------

MR B BOLANE (Sworn, States)

MR LYSTER: Thank you very much. One of my colleagues, Mr Ilan Lax, is
going to assist you in giving your evidence.

MR LAX: Good afternoon, Mr Bolane. --- Good afternoon.

Thank you for coming. Can you just tell us briefly your age please? --- I
am 36 years old.

Thank you. You've told us in your statement that you left South Africa in
1985 to join the ANC in Lesotho, is that correct? --- Yes, that's correct.

	/Why did

Why did you do that? --- I went after a long period of oppression that I
went through when I was still in South Africa. What made me take this
decision was that I have suffered, and I couldn't get my identify
document as from 1977 up to 1985. Where I was staying in Thaba Nchu each
time I go to get a pass they would tell me that I am a Xhosa from
Transkei. I asked them, "How can I get to Transkei and get an identity
document, because I wasn't born in Transkei?" They told me I am a Xhosa,
I should go back to Transkei. I was working in Mafikeng. I went to
Mafikeng to get an identity document. They referred me to Bloemfontein so
that I could get my identity document there. In Bloemfontein they made me
a temporary document. My ID took a long time. I went - I took this
temporary ID and went to look for work because I couldn't get any work.
Luckily I got work. It had already expired. I went on trying to change
the date so that it would be extended so that I could get some work. When
I went to check if my ID had arrived they told me that I must go to the
nearest South African town, which was Lichtenburg. I went to Lichtenburg.
When I got to Lichtenburg, after standing in a long queue for my ID, when
I got to the window I was balancing on the window as I am indicating.
There was a black person at the counter. He asked me what I was looking
for. I told him I am looking for an ID. He just closed the window without
any care. He told me that I should see that it's lunch time. I told him I
didn't know it was lunch time, but he nevertheless closed the window and
left me standing on the counter. We waited until such time that he came
back from lunch. He started attending to me. He told me that I

	/wasn't

wasn't supposed to be there, I was supposed to be in Transkei. I told
him, "I don't know anything about Transkei, I wasn't born in Transkei. I
was born in South Africa, so don't keep on referring me to Transkei."

(Inaudible) ... a moment. Can you tell us when did you eventually get an
ID document? --- I ultimately went outside of the country without getting
my ID. I only got it when I came back from exile in 1992.

Would you now - there are a number of incidents that happened while you
were in exile that you told us about, which start in Dakawa Transit Camp
in July 1985, is that correct? --- Yes, that's correct.

Would you, as briefly as possible, try and tell us about what happened
there? We will then thereafter move on to the other incidents that you've
told us about. --- We were in transit in Dakawa. I had said that I was
going to a university, so we were waiting for scholarships. The others
were going for training. It so happened that one day when I got to Dakawa
I had a problem with the ANC alliance as well as the South African
Communist Party. When I encountered this problem I approached the
authorities. I had made a decision that I wouldn't be able to be a member
of ANC because of its alliance with the South African Communist Party.
When I got to this authority, who was a Pioneer, he was a security. The
security was dealing with everything that was happening there. I told him
my problem, then he called all the others, as well as the co-ordinator of
the transit camp. They sat down. They said I should explain my case. I
went on to explain, and I told them that I had joined the African
National Congress, but I learned later on that it

	/had an

had an alliance with the South African Communist Party, and according to
my beliefs I don't go along with that, so I felt I should resign from the
South African National Congress. They told me that they would call me
later on, but that I knew what was happening so I wasn't supposed to
communicate it to anyone else. I told them that I knew it because that is
why I had approached them. So I went back. A day thereafter somebody came
to me. I was called to the office once more. I went. He introduced
himself as Nthu. Nthu was a security from Mazimbo. He said to me I should
relate that - I felt I should resign from the African National Congress.
They persuaded me that I should not resign, because if I resign life is
going to be tough for me in Tanzania as a refugee. So they didn't want to
see people from South Africa suffering in Tanzania. I said I don't know
about that, but it's going to be difficult for me to go on in something
that I don't believe in. They said to me I should go and rethink the
matter over, then they would call me once more. I should go and sleep
over it. From that day on I observed something that wherever I was going
there was always surveillance. Whether I was going to the bush or whether
I was going to relieve myself there was always somebody watching me. I
approached the security to find out what was going on. He told me there
was nothing going on, and he asked me why should I ask such a question.
Then I left him alone. Nthu came back. Then they asked me what was my
decision. I told them that I had made the final decision. They left me
alone, they never said anything, then they went. I stayed there without
encountering any problem. Life was normal. Then it so happened - I think

	/it was

it was - I am not sure about the times at which this happened. It was in
August. We were taken in buses from Dakawa to Mazimbo. At that time the
then President of the African National Congress, Oliver Thambo, was
coming, so we were going to meet him. He was going to address us.
Everybody was happy. I was also happy too, because it was going to be my
first time to see a man who had been referred by the boers as a terrorist
or somebody who was abominable. I was happy to go and see him. When we
got to Mazimbo there were a lot of people. Mazimbo is just outside
Morogoro. The place was full. We had come to see the President. Our bus
arrived a little bit late when he was about to finish his speech, so we
were standing at the far end. We couldn't see him properly. At the time
that he was leaving, when he was getting into his car, everybody tried to
rush and have a glimpse of the President. Where I was standing, when I
moved on to get a glimpse of the President I felt somebody pulling me
from the back. When I looked I saw a Pioneer. He asked me where I was
going. I said I wanted to see the President. He said I mustn't do that.
He said just like that. Then I said what did he mean. He said to me I
shouldn't do it. I didn't understand what he meant. By that time people
were getting into their cars. He got into his car. The convoy left. We
got into our buses. I was very troubled by the Pioneer's behaviour. I was
asking myself as to what was happening. We went back to Dakawa. Life just
went on as normal. Nthu paid me regular visits, but he wasn't saying
anything in particular. We stayed there until December, if I remember
well. It happened that we went out with other Comrades to a village. So
we went to

	/that village.

that village. We came back a little bit late. When we got there we found
that the supper had already been eaten, but we couldn't get any supper.
When we got back we were so hungry. I decided to go to the dining hall.
When I got to the dining hall I went to the logistics and I spoke to one
Comrade Kenny Rogers. I told him that I was hungry, please organise me
something. We know that we are late. He started talking funny language,
then he asked me who sent us out, we are not going to get any food. He
further told us that there was food, but we weren't going to get it. I
pleaded with him to give us some food. He told us that he wanted us to
feel that he was the boss in the logistics. He was in charge and he could
do anything, and there was absolutely nothing we do about that. We kept
on begging him. Comrade kept on talking and we felt very disturbed by
what he was saying. I started answering him. I told him, "This is not
your food, this is the ANC food, so we want the food so you must give the
food to us."

(Inaudible) ... interrupt you again. Can we just move on to when your
troubles really started, because we're having these long stories before
the actual incidents take place. If you could try and move ahead to - is
it correct that after this argument with Comrade Rogers he reported you
to some other Comrades, and then your troubles really started? Is that
correct? --- Yes, it is correct.

Can you carry on from there please? --- He went to report me to the
security. A Comrade by the name of Vusi came. He was also a security.
Then when he got to me he held me by the hand and said we should go. He
took

	/me to

me to the admin block. When I got there he said I should sit down, he is
coming back. He went away, then he came back with Nthu, as well as two
others, or three. They closed the door behind them. They told me that,
"You are going to tell us who you are." I asked them what they meant.
They told me that I am going to tell them who I really am. They took out
some rods, some very heavy rods. They told me to sit down flat. They
started assaulting me, and they started hitting me with fists, and I fell
down, and they told me to sit down. They started using these rods,
hitting me on the whole body. They were telling me I should tell them who
I am, what was happening? I was causing confusion, and why was I causing
the confusion? I asked them what confusion I was causing because I was
merely asking for food. They kept on kicking me, they kept on trampling
on me. I started bleeding through the nose, as well as the ears. They
kept on assaulting me, and they told me that I am going to tell them who
I really am. I asked them why they were doing this to me. They couldn't
understand, they kept on assaulting me. They assaulted me throughout,
kicking me, using these rods. They were also trampling on me, and I was
bleeding at that time, and I was lying flat on the floor and I kept on
pleading with them. From there they told me that I am going to tell them
who sent me to the ANC. They told me that I was going to tell them. They
continued assaulting me. When I had fallen down and I couldn't stand they
stopped assaulting me momentarily. They kept on repeating the very same
thing, that I was going to tell them. One of them came back. They dragged
me on the floor, dragged me through the door and out. I

	/don't know

don't know where my shoes ended, but they dragged me. There's an engine
room. They put me inside the engine room. They put me in there, they shut
the door behind them. It was late at night. The place was full of grease
because there was an engine. I was dizzy at that time, I didn't know what
was happening. Later on they switched the engine off. After some time I
felt like - I was asking myself why should this happen to me, and I was
beginning to suffocate. I was able to break the door and I went out. When
I went out I proceeded to the tent where I was staying. When I got there
I was asking myself why I was assaulted. Then I decided to go and report
them. I went to Mazimbo to report them. When I got into my tent I was
walking on foot, I didn't have any shoes, so there were boots in my tent
that we were using to work there. I took my boots, I put them on, then I
decided I was going to Mazimbo to report the police, because they said
they are going to assault me. I went there to the village. When I got to
the village I couldn't walk properly. I got another man at Mazimbo
village. He gave me headache tablets, he told me to rest a little bit. I
think I stayed there for about three days, sleeping there. The other
thing that they did was they had assaulted me or hit me underneath my
feet with these rods, so it was difficult for me to walk. But after about
three days it was fine, then I was able to go to Mazimbo. When I got to
the gate in Mazimbo I got some Tanzanians. They called them FF. They
asked me where my permit was. I told them I didn't have it. They said I
couldn't get in. I asked them to call a certain guy for me who was in
there. I told them I didn't have permit but I wanted to see him. I tried
to

	/speak to

speak to them but they just couldn't understand. When they speak to you
and you don't respond they always take action, so I went away, I left
them alone. I went back. On my way back to Dakawa I thought that the
people were going to assault me so I turned back. I waited at the bus
stop. I was waiting for a bus. As I was waiting there I saw a car. I
stopped the car that belonged to the ANC. Fortunately it was Nthu. I
climbed into the car. Then he told me that they said they didn't know
where I had gone to. I told him what had happened. Nthu took me to
Morogoro. When we got to Morogoro he left me in another house. I stayed
and he left. Then there came two Comrades. One of them was P4, the other
one I don't know, I don't know his name. They took me. We went to the
office of the ANC. When we got in there they put me in another room. I
sat there all by myself. Then they came back and took me out of that
room. When I got into the room there were people, Comrades, sitting
there, quite a number of them. I don't remember how many they were. When
I got in there P4 indicated and said, "Here is this man. He is going to
tell us today who he is, what he wants, why is he causing so much
confusion." I was dumbfounded, I just didn't know how to respond. They
took me to another room, where they said I must sit down on the floor. As
I sat on the floor P4 came to me holding knobkerries as well as sjamboks.
There came another five. They said I must put my hands inside my thighs.
They kept on assaulting me then. I was kicked and assaulted. I kept on
begging them, I kept on urging them to spare me, but they kept on telling
me that I should disclose the identity of the person who sent me to the
ANC. They kept

	/on assaulting

on assaulting me. I was already bleeding through the nose. They kept on
kicking ... (incomplete - end of Side A, Tape 9) ... assaulting me on my
whole body, kicking me all over. I told them that I will tell them who
sent me. They said I must tell them. I told them that I didn't know what
they were talking about. They started once more to assault me. They
assaulted me and I told them that I would tell them. They said who sent
me? I said Muleme had sent me. They said, "Fine, now you are prepared to
talk, now we will leave you." They gave me some papers.

After this, all these assaults, you made what you say was a false
confession to them. You made up a long story about how you'd been sent
there as a spy, and what you'd done at school, and a whole lot of other
stuff. --- Yes, I agreed to that.

And then after that it was decided that you would be taken to Dar es
Salaam. --- Yes, that was taken there.

Will you tell us what happened in Dar es Salaam. In fact after that you
were - you were placed in house arrest in Dar es Salaam, and then after
that you went on to Zambia. --- Yes.

Can we then pick up the story at the place called Rest Two in Zambia? ---
When we got to Rest Two it was myself, Comrades - and two other Comrades.
When we got in there we were told to sit at separate places, we mustn't
mix. We sat like that and they told us not to communicate with each
other. The following day there came other people. One of them was Jomo,
as well as Kwesh. I don't know where the other two ended. They took me
into another room. They said I am going to give them full

	/details as

details as to why I was causing confusion in Tanzania, and who sent me to
create such confusion in the ANC. I pleaded with them. I kept on asking
them. I told them that I didn't know anything about that. I told them
that I had actually made a false statement due to being threatened. Then
there came another hefty guy. His name was James. They called him Dada
because he was the head of the security there. He told me that whatever
they did to me wasn't the real thing, the real thing was coming to me. He
said to me I must look behind me. I saw knobkerries, sjamboks. They
indicated that I could see them. I also saw spears, and they told me if I
didn't want to talk they would sort me out. They left me there and they
told me that they were coming back, and when they came back I should be
very prepared to make a statement. They went away and they left me inside
the room. As I was sitting there I realised that these people may kill
me. The person I was left with probably is the one who was keeping guard
on me. I realised that he was a bit intoxicated. I realised that here I
can escape. When we were coming I realised that the main road wasn't very
far from where we were, and I had seen an office of UNH, so I told myself
that when I leave there I am going to the UNHCR office to ask for
assistance. I went out, I went down the street until I got to the office
of UNHCR. They asked me what I wanted. I told them that I wanted the High
Commissioner for Refugees. They told me to sit. Thereafter they took me
and put me into another office, where another woman came in, a white
woman. If I am not mistaken I think she introduced herself as Mrs Zulu or
Mrs Phiri, one of the two, I don't remember quite well.

	/Then she

Then she told me she is the High Commissioner for Refugees, then she sat
down. I explained to her the hardships that I gone through from Tanzania
up to Zambia, and these people were threatening to kill me. I urged her
to assist me because whatever they were alleging wasn't true, I knew
nothing of it. So I urged her to speak to them because I knew nothing
about the allegations. She told me about a certain brigadier that I
should go to who was in Lusaka. Then I said these people were going to
meet me along the way and they were going to assault me. Then she told me
she was coming. She said I should wait. I went to the reception. I waited
for quite a long time, then she called me in. She said to me she was
going to attend to me, I should go out side and sign and she will say
that they should call me. I stood outside the building, just next to the
door. As I was standing there, it wasn't a long time, a car just came in
speeding through the gate. It went straight - it came straight to me. At
that time they opened the doors and I realised these were the people.
They pulled me and put me inside the car. They said I thought I was
clever, I am going to the United Nations and to all those places, and the
people had told them that I was there. They took me, put me inside the
car. They said they were going to teach me a lesson. They took me back to
Rest Two. When we got to Rest Two they put me in a room. They started
assaulting me, and they assaulted me up to such an extent that I couldn't
stand. They left me. When they left me there there were other rooms just
behind. They took me, they put me in one of the rooms. Those rooms looked
like cells. I stayed there locked up in there until we went out of Zambia
and

	/went to

went to Angola.

(Inaudible) ... 1986, is that correct? --- Yes, that was in 1986.

(Inaudible) ... taken to a transit camp called Vienna, you tell us. ---
When we arrived in Luanda we were taken to a transit camp called Vienna.

Thereafter you went to a camp - or you called it a prison camp called
Kibashe. --- It was quite after a long time that we have been to Vienna.
We were picked up at one stage and we were told to get into a Land Rover.
We were two, and some of the commanders, and we were heading for Kibashe,
but we didn't know that we were being taken to Kibashe.

But you got there eventually, and there they changed your code name to
Ginger, is that correct? --- Yes, that's correct.

Now, tell us what happened at Kibashe to you. --- In Kibashe we were put
into certain rooms, where we got other people who were also there locked
up. They told us that there we are not supposed to say who we are, where
we came from, and we were given new names. The following day I was taken
to the administration block. I met a recording officer, who told me his
name was Edison. Edison started speaking to me and told me that I had
come to Camp 32, and I was going to tell him my complete story, and if I
don't co-operate with them they were going to make me co-operate. They
told me it was going to be up to me. He took out some papers, he said I
should write. He said I should write my biography. Then he said these are
not the things that I had written when I was from Tanzania. He took me to
the camp commander. The name of

	/the camp

the camp commander is Pro. Pro told me that, "Here we can do anything
that will make you talk. We can kill you, we can destroy you, nobody will
know whatever happened to you,so you are going to act in accordance with
your instructions." He called others. When the commanders came in they
said I must stand in the centre of the room. They told me I should write
on these papers. I pleaded and told them that I didn't know anything.
They took out coffee. Coffee is what they were referring to was sticks
when they said coffee. Then they started assaulting me on the back with
what they called coffee, and they kept on kicking me with their reef
boots. I was severely assaulted. I fell down. When I fall down they would
pick me up and say, "Continue, talk." I would tell them I didn't know
anything. They threatened me and told me that they were going to show me.
They told me that whatever I was against they were going to make me to be
along the lines. I told them that whatever I had written was true, that I
wanted to resign because of certain reasons. They said they were going to
teach me to do whatever they wanted to do. They made me frog jump. They
call it number nine. They would make me stand as I am indicating. I had
no sense of balance whatsoever, I was falling all over the place, and
they would make me stand erect. They kept on assaulting me. When I fell
down they ceased assaulting me. They went out and I was left with only
one. That was the commander. The commander said to me I don't want to
talk. He told me that these people hadn't done anything to me, they were
going to do the real thing to me. He told me, "We are going to do
something with you." He came to me. He took out his pistol. He came to

	/me, he

me, he pointed it on my forehead. He asked me if I was prepared to talk.
I was very scared, I was shaking. I asked myself as to what am I supposed
to say. He said I should open my mouth. He put his pistol inside my
mouth. He told me he could do anything to me, am I prepared to talk. I
was really shaking, and I said to him, "All right, I will talk," and then
he removed the pistol, he took some papers. And he said to me, "Tell me,
what brought you here? What were you doing inside the country? Who sent
you to this mission outside the country so that you can infiltrate the
ANC?" He wanted me to tell him the missions, all the missions that I
undertook in the country. And I started creating stories. I told them all
the things that I did, and I told them the people I reported to while I
was still in the country.

(Inaudible) ... stop you again there. You've given us the full details of
the story you told them, and in the interests of time I am going to ask
us to carry on and speed up a little bit. The story you've told them is
recorded here, and after that story was given to them they seemed to have
accepted that story, and then you were sent to a prison. --- Yes, I
stayed there. They didn't allow us to call it a prison. That was Camp 32.

Camp 32, thank you. --- It's a camp outside Kibashe. It's in the bush.
They call it Camp 32. I was there at that time.

(Inaudible) ... were made to do hard labour, and you were beaten from
time to time, is that correct? --- Yes, that is true.

Now, you've also told us that in 1988 you became unwell and you developed
hypertension. --- Yes, it is

	/true.

true.

Just tell us a little bit about your treatment and so on. --- As we were
still there we were given tablets, Diazapan. That was what they were
giving us for hypertension. I continued being like that. My condition
didn't improve. Even now I am still taking the treatment.

Now, in 1988 and 1990 you were taken to Gokalota town, is that correct?
--- Yes, we were taken from Angola, the bases of ANC, then we were taken
to Uganda. Just outside there there was a camp where we were taken to.

(Inaudible) ... when the ANC pulled out of Angola. --- Yes.

And you say that you were released in 1991, and then you resigned from
the ANC and you returned home, is that correct? --- Yes, that's correct.

Now, somewhere in here you mentioned that you were tried at a tribunal.
If you can just fit that in for us, because it's not clear exactly where
it fits in in the time frame. --- Before we went out of Angola in 1988,
if I remember quite well, we were taken. I think we were 21 or 22 from
that camp. We were taken to Luanda. When we got to Luanda we were given
charge sheets and they told us that there was going to be a tribunal. On
that day of the tribunal they told us that we would get attorneys from
the ANC who would represent us. We waited for the tribunal. On that
particular we were taken to - initially we had cleaned a hall where they
said the tribunal was going to be held, but later on we were taken to a
house. We got in there one by one. They would tell us to stick to our
stories. They said, "Whatever you said at the camp

	/"you stick

you stick to it, and if you don't stick to that story you know what's
going to happen to you. If you stick to your story we'll be lenient to
you." When we got in there with all the counts that were listed on the
charge sheet I had about six counts listed. I don't remember some of
them. One of them was infiltration, then other one was trying to desert
the organisation. I don't remember the other ones, but they were six in
all. So we appeared in front of the tribunal. When I got in there they
just read the record that I had written at the camp. They asked me what I
expected from them. From there you went back outside. We were taken back
to the camp thereafter, after the tribunal.

(Inaudible) ... outcome of the hearing or anything? --- No, we never go
it.

Now, you said that you resigned from the ANC after you were released in
1991 and then you returned home, is that correct? --- I got out of the
ANC in 1991 when I got to Tanzania, and I arrived home in 1992.

And then you applied to rejoin the ANC once you came back, is that
correct? --- Yes, it's true, because when I got here I realised that I
wanted this matter to be investigated further, so - I just want to
explain that little part. I started in Uganda when they had just unbanned
the liberation movements. I said to them, "I want this to be
reinvestigated because it wasn't true." I realised that the ANC had been
unbanned, though there was a difficulty to investigate the matters back
home. So it was going to be easy now since the unbanning. They made me
write my biographies, but nothing happened thereafter until we came out.
When I arrived in South

	/Africa I

Africa I said I felt that I had been treated unfairly by the African
National Congress, so I reckoned that I wanted the matter to be
reinvestigated. I wanted the truth to come out. I wanted my name to be
cleared, because the allegations were not true. I realised that I should
go back to the ANC, because if I was outside it would not be possible for
me to clear the matter out, so I re-applied in 1992.

Okay. What would you like us to do for you about this terrible story that
you've told us? --- What I would like the Truth Commission to do for me
is that I would like the truth to be revealed. I want the ANC to come
with the truth. I want further investigations to be done. I want them to
dig out for the truth. I want to know whether it's true what they are
alleging. I want my organisation to apologise for the appalling treatment
that they gave me. I want them to apologise, because I wanted to go to
school but I could not go because of the treatment that they gave me.

Thank you, Mr Bolane. What we will try and do from our side is try and
investigate the matter to the extent that it's possible. We also
understand that the ANC will be coming with their own submission, where
they intend to deal with a lot of issues that happened in some of the
camps, and with a bit of luck they might tell us something about your
story, or we may be able to uncover something about your story as well. I
hand over to the Chairperson.

	---------------------

I just want to clear one thing. There's no time, I know that. Mr Bolane,
there are strange names here to me, the people who are mentioned here in
your statements. Are

	/these

these people South Africans? Names like Jomo, James, Kwesh, Abba, Pro,
P4. All those people, are they South Africans? --- They are all South
Africans. These are pseudo names, because when we were outside we were
using pseudo names. They are South Africans, all of them.

(Inaudible) ... people. --- I know some of them. They are here. I don't
know their real names. I only know them according to their pseudo names.
Some of them are in top positions here.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mr Bolane, for giving us that story. Thank you for
being patient and having waited all day to give this story. It's clearly
a story that you needed to tell very badly, and we are glad to hear it.
It is a sad story, and it is sad that you, having left the country with
such enthusiasm, should have returned a disillusioned and a sick person
as a result of what happened to you, and it seems to me that your life
has changed substantially as a result of that decision that you took to
go into exile. Those things should never have happened to you,
particularly at the hands of an organisation which has always had such
strong views about that sort of arbitrary violence.

I note from what you said in your evidence that you have rejoined the
ANC, and it does indicate that there is some reconciliation between you
and that party, and we can certainly continue a mediation process between
yourself and the ANC if you wish. We can arrange that for you.
Furthermore, if you require treatment, further medical treatment - I note
that you are getting treatment from the Botshabelo Health Clinic. If you
are not satisfied with

	/that treatment

that treatment you may be able to get treatment through the route that we
have organised with the Ministry of Health here in Bloemfontein.

So thank you once again for coming in and for telling us your story, and
we wish you well. Thank you very much.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: That is the last witness that we will hear today. We will be
meeting again tomorrow morning at 9.00 am, and tomorrow will be the final
day of evidence. We will have slightly less people giving evidence
tomorrow. Today we had 13 people, I think tomorrow we'll probably have 11
people. We will finish slightly earlier because we have to leave to
return to the various places that we are going to. Thank you very much
for being with us today. You are most welcome to join us tomorrow, and to
hear the witnesses who will be giving evidence tomorrow. Could we please
stand while the remaining witnesses leave the room.

PROCEEDINGS ADJOURNED TO 1996/11/04

	---------------------

