	PROCEEDINGS HELD AT




	PROCEEDINGS HELD AT

	BLOEMFONTEIN -02-04 July 1996

	DAY 1

	[PAGES 1 - 118]



	Index

	I N D E X

NO	ITEM	PAGE N°

1.	Mr Molehe.....................................................	1 - 5

2.	Thiwe Magadalena Mhlabende.............................	6 - 11

3.	Gladys Mosidi Mohali.......................................	12 - 29

4.	Ellen Kaloti....................................................	30 -
38

5.	Ratsebe Jeremiah Mekwe...................................	39 - 45

6.	Metabo Adelena Matsunyane...............................	46 - 54

7.	Erica Doreen Motsabe Kokunsi............................	55 - 60

8.	Mr and Mrs Thapedi.........................................	61 - 70

9.	Shadrack Theko Olifant.....................................	71 - 80

10.	Dikaledi Adelaide Motsaneng.............................	81 - 90

11.	Bernice Jakila................................................	91 - 95

12.	Paulina Butsibo and Ester Tsetsi.........................	95 - 106

13.	Ezekiel Matsidiso Marais..................................	107 - 118

	---oOo---

COMMISSIONER: Mr Molehe, you are in one way making a bit of history
today, because you are the first witness ever to appear before the
Commission in the Free State. Some of your colleagues and friends have
appeared in Durban, but you are the first in the Free State, and we
welcome you most warmly. It's not easy to be first, and you're probably
feeling a little bit nervous, but I hope that you can relax and realise
that the Commission, appointed by the President, is here on behalf of the
nation, and cares about you and your own pain. We identify with you. You
have come to tell us about the death of your son, which is a very, very
hard thing to do and a very heavy burden to carry. Before you do that I
must ask you to take the oath, and I'd be grateful if you would please
stand now.

	---------------------

MR MOLEHE (Sworn, States)

CHAIRMAN: Mr Molehe, we always ask one of our Commissioners or Committee
Members to be of assistance to witnesses and survivors, and in this
instance my colleague, Mrs Virginia Gcabashe, is going to lead you and to
assist you in any way, but she knows, and I know, and we all know, that
it's your story and it belongs to you. I am going to ask her to take over
now. Thank you.

MRS GCABASHE: Mrs Molehe, we greet you. I hope that even if you've come
to relate a very painful story you are prepared to tell us all that you
know about losing your son. We sympathise with you in your loss. In short
I will request you to try and explain and give us a background as to what
happened to your son, that is the circumstances surrounding his
disappearance. We would also like to know about your family background in
brief.

	/--- My

--- My name is Mr Molehe. My son went away in 1980. It was after the
burial of Makotho in Pahameng. The police arrived at my place at 1
o'clock. They were driving in eight vehicles and four dogs. They knocked
and I opened the door. On the table there were peanuts, and they accused
me of selling dagga. They opened everything on the table and they
discovered it was peanuts and they took it. The next day two policemen
arrived to fetch me. They wanted me to go to the Special Branch, and they
told me that, "Your son is in Lesotho. He ran away. We are now giving you
this letter so that you go and fetch him." They gave me a letter and I
was given a special passport. I left with my wife. We went to Lesotho.
And then we found our son in Europa, Lesotho, and he said to me, "I will
not come back because the police are looking for me." The man who was on
the gate said to me, "Your son is old enough." He was over 18 and he
decided to leave the country. And I came back home, I informed the police
that he is now in Tanzania. Towards the elections I joined the ANC and I
got a card. Mr Motsabe came to me and he said to me, "Your son is dead,
but we don't know where, and you don't have to expect anything from the
ANC." That was the first point. And the second point, I remember
Mpanjani, who was one of the people who tortured my son. The white man I
don't remember any more. Mpanjani used to come and fetch my son. My wife
was at home and I was at work. Mpanjani would come to my house via our
next-door neighbours. My son realised that it was Mpanjani and he jumped
over the fence and he ran. When Mpanjani got into the house my son was
not there. I was deeply hurt, and I even got a heart attack. I will never
forget Mr Motsabe's

	/words.

words. He was together with Mr Maleke from Johannesburg when he told me
that my son was dead, and he said I shouldn't expect anything from the
ANC, there will not be help of any sort. And I said to him, "I wasn't
expecting any help. I just wanted to know where my son died, because I do
not even know his grave." Since my son left I have never cut my hair,
because we believe when death has befell your family you have to cut your
hair, but I cannot because I don't know whether my son lives or has he
died. I really don't know.

Thank you, Mr Molehe, from hearing of your testimony. I would like to ask
you just a few questions so that you can elaborate on your story. You
said you got a letter that said you must go to Lesotho. Who gave you the
transport or the fare? When you got to Lesotho you met with a
Commissioner of Refugees. Who arranged this meeting? --- When we got to
Europa they showed us - when I got there I came across a person who was
holding a gun. He is the one who told me that my child is at Monthaka.

You said an SB arrived at your home. Do you know his whereabouts, this
Mpanjani? --- I normally meet Mpanjani in town. I think he is still
around.

You said that the ANC told you that your son had died. Did you get any
death certificate? What means have you done to get a death certificate?
--- Mr Motsabe told me that my son died and they don't know where he
died, and I just lost hope, I didn't know where to go. Because I was told
that his death certificate will be sent to the Premier and the Premier
will pass it over to me, but I didn't even know the Premier then, and I
lost hope

	/and I

and I didn't do anything. While I was listening to the news on the radio
I heard that the Commission is going to be in Bloemfontein, and I went to
the St John Presbyterian Church to submit my statement.

Have you ever had any visit from the ANC after that? --- No, not after
that.

Mr Molehe, we are listening to your story. Is there anything else that
you would like to know, besides the fact that your son is dead and where
is he buried? Do you think there is any assistance that the Commission
might give you, even though that there isn't much that we can do? --- No,
I have a request. I don't know what to ask from the Commission. The
Commission will see what kind of help will they offer.

Thank you very much. I want to say once more we sympathise with you, we
really sympathise with you.

	---------------------

DR MGOJO: Mr Molehe, according to your statement here it would appear
that you son, when he was in standard eight had a type of experience. Is
that true, that he was still in standard eight? --- Yes, that's true.

Thank you. And then he left to join the ANC in exile, is that true? ---
That's true.

And it would appear that later you too joined the ANC. Is that true? ---
Yes, that's true.

Before this happened you were involved with the Security Police. Was
there anybody in your family who was an activist? --- No, nobody.

So were you surprised that you and your family had to get this type of
treatment from the Security Police? --- Yes, I was really surprised.

	/Thank you,

Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

	---------------------

MR LAX: Sorry, Mr Molehe, just one small question for clarification. You
mentioned that two people from the ANC visited you to inform you of your
son's death. One was Mr Motsabe. I didn't catch the other name very
clearly. If you wouldn't mind just telling it to us again please. ---
They said it was Mr Maleke from Johannesburg.

	---------------------

Mr Molehe, we thank you very much for coming here. We also thank your
effort of having come to give your testimony. As I have already pointed
out when I was praying, we ask the Lord to comfort you. May He be the one
who gives His holy spirit to strengthen you. We shall try by all means to
act according to your wishes so that we may try to solve your problems,
so that we may see or find out as to where your son has been buried, as
to what has happened where. We thank you very much.

	---------------------

COMMISSIONER: Mrs Mhlabende, can you hear my voice in your earphones?

MRS MHLABENDE: Yes, I can hear you.

COMMISSIONER: I want to say good morning to you, and to welcome you very
warmly to the Commission. We are very glad that you took the trouble to
come to the Commission and to tell your story to our members of our
staff, but now to tell it to the Commission itself and to the people who
are in this City hall, and to many more people outside. It's very
important that people tell stories of what happened to them, whatever
that may be, and we are very grateful to you for coming. You are going to
tell us about the time when you were in great distress when your own was
burnt down, but before you do that I would like you to please stand for
the oath.

	---------------------

THIWE MAGADALENA MHLABENDE (Sworn, States)

COMMISSIONER: Thank you very much. Please be seated. Dr Mgojo is going to
take over from me and lead you as you tell your story. Thank you.

DR MGOJO: Mrs Mhlabende, I want you to relax and tell all what is causing
your pain as far as the burning of your house is concerned. Don't fear
anything, just say everything. But before I do that can you just tell us
about your family, the background about your family? --- Can you please
tell me - say what to do.

Do you speak Zulu? Okay. If you speak Xhosa you will understand me,
because Zulu and Xhosa are close. You will help Mrs - please tell us all
that you went through. Tell us the pain you felt when your house was
burnt down, but before you tell us that could you just

	/give us

give us a brief background of your family. Who are you, where do you come
from, etcetera? This is a very painful experience that you went through,
having your house burnt down. Especially if you are a black person it
takes a long time for you to rebuild that house . --- You have taken
quite a long time to build that house, and at the end of the day you have
it burnt down. We sympathise with you very much. I request you to tell us
who you are, where you are coming from, etcetera. --- My name is Thiwe. I
am from Butsabelo. My name is Thiwe. I am from Butsabelo. I was staying
at Butsabelo. That was section K in Butsabelo. They burnt my house in
1993. They started throwing stones at my house. That was in November. It
was on a Friday. On a Saturday we slept in the house, and the Sunday we
slept in the house, and then on Monday they threw the petrol bomb. Only
the bedroom got burnt. We were able to run away, but we came back to try
and extinguish the flames. All that was in the bedroom got burnt.
Thereafter we were sleeping outside because we didn't have any place to
sleep, and we were keeping a vigil as to what was happening. A week
thereafter my husband, as well as my brother, were staying outside so
that I could get inside and sleep because I was looking after my
father-in-law. They burnt my place for the third time. That is they heard
one of the perpetrators - there are trees in my hard, so he was hiding in
the trees. So when he got in there they don't know how he came in there,
they just heard noise in the bushes. When they looked they caught a young
man. When they asked him what he wanted he ran away. They chased him. At
that time I heard there was some noise because I

	/was inside

was inside the house. Then I went outside to investigate. They asked him
who he was. He ran away and they actually chased him. When they got him
they assaulted him. We later called on the police that night. When we
called the police the police came, but I said they mustn't come into my
house because I am afraid the Comrades would burn us later and they would
also kill my children because they were burning the houses. The policemen
came. They took us to the police station. They took this would-be
perpetrator to the police station. We also went there. My husband opened
a docket, but that docket didn't really materialise because he did not
appear in court. The docket got lost, and my husband was sentenced
because they said he had assaulted the would-be perpetrator. They were
sentenced to two years inside - outside, and one year. They spent six
months in prison, and nobody was working at that time. They were the
breadwinners. I sold my house because I couldn't make ends meet. My
husband got out in July of that same year. (Pause)

Have you finished giving your testimony? --- I feel as if I am
suffocating. I am getting dizzy.

Bring her forth. (Pause) --- It was like that. That's how it went on. It
was very difficult for me to make ends meet. It is still like that even
now when my husband had come out of the prison. I believe I have finished.

Thank you. I'll ask you just a few questions. Please tell me if you can't
hear any of the questions. In your statement you said the people who
burned your house were Comrades. Who are the Comrades? --- It was Mahlo
and Mainline, as well as Maputhi.

	/No, I am

No, I am not asking the names, but I am just asking what are the
Comrades? Is it - it's ANC? --- Yes, it's ANC.

How old are these people who burned your house down? --- The other one
was quite old. The other ones were just juveniles. But they were quite
grown up, but I don't know how to explain their ages. I just know their
ages, but ... (incomplete)

When you think that amongst all those houses in Butsabelo why did they
choose your house? What do you think was the reason? Did you have an
altercation with the Comrades? --- My husband never collaborated with
them when they wanted to arrange or stage stay-aways. We were working and
we never wanted to take any part in stay-aways because our bosses were
promising us that they would chuck us away if we don't turn up for work.
So we never used to go to their meetings. Maybe they took offence because
we didn't.

In your statement you said your husband was arrested because he wanted to
revenge. How did he want to revenge? --- He was arrested when he was
trying to revenge. He was arrested when they were trying to burn our
house for the third time. The first time they threw stones, the second
time on a Monday they burnt the house down. A week thereafter I believe -
I should think it was on the third week - they had come to try and burn
the house down again, but they couldn't really do it, so my husband got
arrested at that stage.

We don't seem to be seeing eye to eye. In your statement Ms Magdalena it
says your husband wanted to revenge. Now what I am trying to say, what
was he using

	/when he

when he wanted to revenge that caused him to be arrested? --- He never
wanted to revenge. I think the person who wrote the statement did not
understand me because I speak Xhosa, and the person who was writing the
statement spoke Zulu. I'll put it in that way that we didn't actually
understand each other.

Thank you.

	---------------------

DR BORAIN: Mrs Mhlabende, just to try and clarify that last part, I think
you mentioned that on the third occasion there was someone hiding in the
bushes or in the trees, and who obviously was wanting to attack your
house again, and I think your husband chased him. Did you say that he
assaulted him, and for that reason he was arrested. --- (Inaudible)

(Inaudible) ... for assault of someone who was trying to attack your
house, and was sentenced for two years, and served for six months in
prison. Did the police ever catch the people who tried to burn your house
down, or assault you or stone your house? --- (Inaudible) ... arrested
them.

They did arrest them? They didn't arrest them? --- Yes.

Your husband was defending the house and he is arrested, and the people
who tried to burn your house go free. Is that what you're telling us? ---
Yes, he was arrested for that.

One last question. You mentioned that there was a docket that your
husband must have laid charges against the people who burnt your house.
That docket was lost. Who lost the docket? --- I don't know who lost this

	/docket

docket because this docket was not available, because when this guy went
there and then he told the police that he was assaulted by my husband. My
husband stabbed him, and this guy said my husband was trying to take his
watch, but my husband's docket wasn't there.

Thank you very much.

	---------------------

MRS GCABASHE: I've got a question ... (incomplete - end of Side A, Tape
1) ... we all sympathise with you. We want to encourage you as well as in
your pain. We sympathise with you and your family. We shall wait and see
whether we can actually help your or assist you in your wishes, but you
should know that the Commission doesn't have the authority or the powers.
We will have to tell the President, come up with suggestions or
recommendations as to how to help you, then at the end of the day he is
the one who passes this to the Parliament, and it's the Parliament that
makes the final decision as to what assistance we should give you if you
are going to get any assistance.

We thank you for being present. We ask the Lord to anoint your wounds and
also help you in your difficulties. Thank you.

	---------------------

COMMISSIONER: Mrs Mohali, just let me make sure you can hear me, and that
I can hear you. Can you hear me through the earphones?

MRS MOHALI: Yes, I can hear you, Sir.

COMMISSIONER: All right. To help me, and to help the Commission, and also
to help the people who are here to hear your story, I would ask you to
try and speak as loudly as possible, because everybody wants to hear you.
May I, on behalf of the Commission, welcome you very warmly to this
hearing. You have not one, but two very distressing and sat stories to
tell, which involved your two sons, Bokile and Christopher, and we're
going to listen to that in a moment. It's a very heavy story, but you are
amongst friends, and we will hear you and we will sympathise with you as
you tell that story. Before you start will you please stand so that you
can take the oath?

	---------------------

GLADYS MOSIDI MOHALI (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Please be seated. Mrs Mohali, you have
been sitting and waiting for your turn, and it can make one very nervous,
but this is not a dentist's room, not even a doctor's room, it's a
Commission appointed by the President to hear your story, and I hope that
you will be very relaxed as you tell it, as much as it is possible to be
under the circumstances. I am going to try and help you to tell that
story, and I may well have some questions for you, but first tell us your
story, tell us who you are, where you come from something of your
background, and then tell us first about the death of your son, Bokile,
and when we have finished there you can tell us about the torture of your
son,

	/Christopher.

Christopher. We would like to hear from you now. --- My name is Mrs
Mohali. I come from Rockland. When I start relating this story of Bokkie.
Bokkie's my son. He was at high school. At all times when he was still at
school the police used to come and trouble him at home. They used to
arrest him and say he's an ANC member. And at some stage it happened that
he was arrested when he was with Christopher. They arrested him and they
kept him in a flat, and at times he would come back and at times I would
run after him. Thereafter in 1978 Bokkie skipped the country. I didn't
even know that he had skipped the country. I looked for him. I even went
to the charge office to go and tell them that my son has disappeared and
I don't know where he's gone to. It was on a Friday. The following Monday
a policeman came to my house. The policeman was from the Special Branch.
Then he came to tell us that my son had skipped the country. As we were
still sitting, not knowing where our children are, they told us that our
children had gone to West Germany, only to find that they were not in
West Germany, they were in Lesotho. From there they came and told us that
we must go to Lesotho to look for our children in Lesotho, and we must
come back with them. They made special passports for us and we went to
Lesotho. When we got to Lesotho we found them in a camp. There was nobody
at that camp. When we told them that the police had told us to bring them
with they told us that they cannot come back to South Africa because the
policemen were assaulting them and were troubling them, so they were not
prepared to come back home. As we were still there he attended the school
at Lesotho. When he finished his matric they said he had got

	/a scholarship.

a scholarship. I didn't even know where this scholarship was. He was
still in Lesotho. We stayed without them, and on a certain day we went to
Lesotho once more. He phoned, he said the Maseru Cafe. He said I will get
them at the Maseru Cafe. Then he told me that he was still in Tanzania.
Then he came back home. Thereafter the police since 1978 never stopped
troubling us. They would wake up in the morning, kick the doors. When
they get into the house they would cause confusion, break everything. We
didn't know what they wanted. They didn't even want to see Mr Mohali.
That is when I opened up a case, because I realised that they were going
to kill my husband so I took it upon myself to continue with the case.
From there in 1986 there came another lady by the name of Ma Stilo,
Ginelwe Stilo. When she got me at home she said to me, "Bokkie has died."
I was surprised as to where was Bokkie when he died. She told me that he
died in Thaba Nchu. I asked her what had killed him. She told me it's the
Thaba Nchu police who killed my son. I went to Thaba Nchu. When I got to
Thaba Nchu I asked at the charge office in Thaba Nchu as to who was
killed. They told me it was a terrorist from Lesotho. They further told
me that I should come on the following Monday. I asked them where my son
had died. They told me about the Thaba Nchu location by the name of
Ramahale. I went to Ramahale. I asked this lady as to where does the
person come from who died. She told me that it was Steve's friend. Steve
Bonganchu is my friend. Then they said he dumped - he left them and he
said he was going to pick them up later on. Thereafter I told her that
according to my knowledge that was my child, and as I am speaking you
must look at

	/this person

this person because he looks exactly like me, he is my son. On a Monday I
went back to the Thaba Nchu charge office to ask them about my son. I met
with Captain Buckall. Captain Buckall is an Afrikaner and he shouted at
me. He kept on telling me that I shouldn't come and ask him about
murderers, I must go out of the office. I was very surprised as to what
he meant. I didn't know what to do. I went out of the charge office. As I
was going out of the charge office I went to Mr Motsabe. When I got to Mr
Motsabe I told him that Mr Buckall had chased me out and told me that
that wasn't my son, it was a terrorist from wherever he came from. I went
back to where he had died. When I got to where he had died they told me
that he was in the house and somebody came and told him that he must stay
right there. The people who must come and fetch him, that is the ANC
people, will be there. Then he remained there. As he was still sleeping,
according to the way the son of that house was telling us, he said a man
arrived in a car and told him to just stay there because they were coming
to fetch him. Only a few moments thereafter two cars came. Then he said,
"Here are the two cars that have come to fetch you." When he got there it
wasn't two cars, it was many cars that had come. When he tried to escape
through the back door there were more cars with white people inside, and
most of them were Ladybrand cars having Ladybrand registrations, as well
as Bophutatswana cars. At that time when he tried to escape they shot
him, and he rolled and rolled on the floor until such time that he got
into the toilet of the back opposite house. When he got in there they
came and finished him off right inside the toilet. They shot him, but he

	/managed to

managed to get out still. As he was going out they threw him with a bomb,
and the bomb exploded. When this bomb exploded he was in tatters. That is
from the chest, the arms. He looked very terrible. At that time I went
back to the police when I heard this message. I told the police that may
they please give me the corpse so that I can go bury my own son. They
never ever wanted to talk to me, they didn't even want to give me the
corpse. They didn't even know that I knew about the corpse, I had already
heard as to what had happened. They refused to give me my son's corpse. I
went there several times seeing my son's corpse. I couldn't get my
corpse. Mr Motsabe said to me he is going to get me an attorney. He went
to Mr Kittens. Mr Kittens gave me his partner, who was Mr Holtshausen. Mr
Holtshausen took me or went with me. We went to Thaba Nchu. When we got
there I actually showed him that, "There's the man who killed my son. It
is Mr Buckall." When we got to Mr Buckall Mr Holtshausen told him who he
is and where he comes from. He actually chased him out of the office and
said he didn't want to speak to him. He chased him out of the office.
Thereafter we went with Mr Holtshausen to where my son had died to go and
fetch some statements. We wrote the statements then came back. As we were
coming back towards home - I stayed, I believe two days or three days -
my cousin came to me and said to me we should go right away. She has had
news that the corpse - my cousin is Doreen Sibuko. When Doreen got to me
she told me that they say the corpse is in Moroka Hospital. We went to
Moroka Hospital to get the corpse. When we got to the hospital we met
with the sister in charge. We asked her

	/as to

as to whether they did have an unknown corpse. She said yes, they do. We
asked her as to where he is the one who was killed by the police. She
said yes. She said we should wait, she is going to speak to the
superintendent, because the superintendent had given orders that if
anyone comes to look for the corpse they should wait until they talk to
him. For about an hour waiting for this sister. It was quite a long time,
it could have been more than an hour. When the sister came back she was
very hurt. Apparently she was not supposed to have told us that the
corpse was there, and probably she was going to lose her job. She told us
to go to the superintendent's office because the superintendent wanted to
see us. We went out to the superintendent. When we got to him the
superintendent told us that he is very sorry about us and the corpse,
because that corpse wasn't my son's it was a YB's corpse. They were
controlling it and they had actually taken it. I told him that the sister
had told us that there was a corpse. He actually denied and said no, they
had taken the corpse. We were very surprised as to the contrasts. We went
out crying, very confused, not knowing what to do. I told Mr Motsabe. Mr
Motsabe sent us to Red Cross so that we may find the corpse. When Mr
Motsabe came the Red Cross people they took the case. They took it to the
Thaba Nchu Police Station. They went there personally. They were told to
go to the Bophutatswana headquarters. When they were supposed to go there
it was when they were told to go out to South Africa because they didn't
know what had happened to the corpse. I stayed. Last year we were told to
wipe or take people who had died out of the house permits. Now I had a
house

	/where he

where he had grown up. When I went to look for the death certificate from
the ANC offices I was supposed to take it to the court. The Court said
they don't want that death certificate, they want a real death
certificate as to where the child had died. When I came from the ANC
offices I went to Thaba Nchu. From Thaba Nchu I told them that I am
seeking my son's death certificate, and at Thaba Nchu they gave me a
death certificate of unknown corpse. They didn't write anything. They
even gave me a grave number as to where the child had been buried. I
brought it with. When I got to court the Court couldn't accept. They
further sent me back and said they must make a proper death certificate,
not a death certificate that have got a lot of unknown, unknown
information. Thereafter an MK member, Blackie, had helped me to obtain
the first death certificate that had unknowns. Now, when I couldn't get
it I kept on going back to Mr Motsabe. When I went to Mr Motsabe I told
him that they had given me the death certificate at Thaba Nchu by Captain
Mokubi. They had given me that death certificate as well as the grave
number. He said to me he will look for Colonel Erasmus, who would go
there, and I told him that I had told Captain Mokubi as to why he gave me
such a certificate because my son had a file there, and I had seen the
file. When we got to Colonel Erasmus he took us to Thaba Nchu, where I
wanted to show him my son's file. And they refused to show me the photos
as well as the post-mortem report. The colonel went up and down with me.
We even went to the grave. When we got to the grave that grave had its
own owner. It was written Maria Selamoni. It wasn't my son's grave. The
colonel went back to look for the file but he

	/couldn't

couldn't get hold of the file. He left me and he told me that Buckall is
in Bethuli, so we must go and look for him in Bethuli. When we got to
Bethuli Buckall was shown where the file is and he came out with the
file. Mr Motsabe said we should just leave the file as is, they'll see
about it at the Truth Commission. I never knew where my son's grave was.
I don't know where his death certificate is. I don't have it in my
possession.

I wonder if we could just pause there before we hear about Christopher.
Just a few questions. You have told a very terrifying story, and a very
sad one, but you have been very, very brave. (Pause) Are you okay? Just
take your time. (Pause) Can we continue now? --- Yes, we can continue.

Thank you. Your son, Bokile, how old was he when he went to Lesotho in
1978? --- He was born in 1958.

So he was 20 years old. He was a young man. Was he very interested in
politics as a young man? --- Yes, he was very interested in politics.

Okay. And you went to see him in Lesotho. --- Yes, I went to look for him
in Lesotho and I found him there.

Did he go with his brother or did he go on his own? --- He was together
with other boys who were schooling together with him. They left in a
group.

And whilst he was in Lesotho he went to school and he got his matric, is
that right? --- Yes, that's correct. He went to school and he passed his
matric. And I even asked him, "Who is paying for your school fees?" and
he said they are being subsidised by the interior.

Fine. And did you - were you in contact with him

	/from time

from time to time, either by telephone or letter or friends, in any way?
--- I personally went to Lesotho to visit him.

Thank you. Now, in 1986 is that when he came back to the country? ---
When he came back in 1986 he wanted to see his brother in Lesotho,
because he was now an MK member.

Which brother is that? --- Christopher.

Thank you. Now, when your son Bokile - Bokkie, I think you call him -
when he came back to South Africa was he working underground or was he -
what was he doing? Was he in touch with you? --- He came to Lesotho as an
MK member, and then he wanted to see his younger brother. When he was
supposed to go back the Lesotho Government was overthrown by Leganya(?)
and they couldn't get into any international plane, so he had to come to
South Africa so that he can go back.

I see. And you got a message that your son, Bokkie, had been killed, and
that started a very, very, very long journey from police station to
police station, from mortuary, Red Cross, hospital, houses, townships,
all desperately trying to find out what had happened. Is that right? ---
Yes, that's correct, because after receiving the news that he had died I
went to the police stations and they didn't allow me to see him. I even
went to Lesotho to find out whether had he been to Lesotho, and they said
yes, he had been to Lesotho, but he is now back. And I said to them, "No,
he is not back, he is now dead." They said, "No, we don't believe you."

And to this day you don't know where Bokkie was buried, but tell me a
little bit more about the person who

	/told you

told you how he was killed by the Security Police. Who was that who told
you that when you went to the house? --- This house I got when I asked
another policeman as to where my son had been killed. This policeman told
me it's Haramakari(?), and I must look for Mrs Matheho. I went there, I
looked for the place until I got the place, and I got Mrs Theko. That is
where they told me what had actually happened. That is Mrs Theko as well
as her son. They told me how Bokkie had died, how come the police killed
him. And when the police went there they told me Bokkie, my son, had a
bag, a travelling bag. That bag contained ammunition as well as bullets.
And when I saw this file this file was with Mr Motsabe. He is the one who
showed me.

(Inaudible) ... at all? --- No, I never saw the handbag, I just saw it in
a photo.

(Inaudible) ... the Moroka Hospital because you heard that your son's
body was there. Can you remember the name of the superintendent? --- Yes,
I still remember, but Christopher, my son, can tell the name. I have
forgotten the name.

(Inaudible) ... that later. Thank you very much. Now, who is Colonel
Erasmus? --- Colonel Erasmus is the person that Mr Motsabe got. Only Mr
Motsabe knows who Colonel Erasmus is.

(Inaudible) ... to help you to find the file, and at last at Bethuli you
saw the file, did you, on your son? --- Yes ... (inaudible - end of Side
B, Tape 1) ... so that Buckall may point where he put the file.

And did you get to see the file? --- Yes, I did see the file. It was the
second time I was seeing the

	/file. I

file. I saw it when they were refusing to give it to me. They just showed
it to me when I was at the Thaba Nchu charge office. This file had my
son's photos, as well as how the bomb had actually ripped his body apart,
but I couldn't see the face. At some of the photos he was sleeping on his
tummy. I couldn't see his face, I could only see his back. His body was
destroyed savagely.

(Inaudible) ... more questions. You mentioned that there was a
post-mortem and there was also an inquest, but was that also in the file,
so you haven't got copies of the findings of the post-mortem? ---
(Inaudible) ... that file. There was this bag which they say had
ammunition. There was also where he fell, also where the bomb had
exploded. It's just two or three photos inside that file that I saw.

(Inaudible) ... very much. You've given us quite a lot of clues, and the
Commission is obviously going to try and contact the various police
stations that you've mentioned to see if we can try and find out exactly
what happened, and very especially to try and find out where your son was
buried, because I know that's very, very important for you and your
family. But now just before - and you've been very brave, and I don't
want to prolong this, but you did want to tell us, I think, about your
second son, Christopher, who was detained, and you said he was tortured.
Could you tell us quite briefly what happened there. --- After Bokkie had
gone they went after Christopher, my younger son. At each and every time
they were just on Christopher's neck. They were trying to torture him
because now his elder brother wasn't there. In 1980, when I realised that
my child can't go to school

	/properly

properly any more, I went to Lesotho to try and seek a school for him to
attend. He attended the school, and they took him back to JC until he
went to senior matric. He passed his matric in Cambridge. When he
finished his matric in Cambridge he had already got a scholarship. They
had given him a scholarship that they would give him a bursary because he
had got distinctions in all his courses. When the schools were closed
Christopher came back home. When he came back home it was in 1984 now.
When he came back home the schools were closed. We went to work, that is
my husband and I. We left Christopher asleep. When Christopher was still
asleep I got a call when I was at work. They told me that Christopher had
been handcuffed by the police. They also put a Balaclava on his eyes. I
didn't know what was happening. I went to tell my boss as to what was
happening at home. My boss gave me money and she said I must hurry up and
see what was happening. I never went straight home. Just as I was from
work I went to Fountain. When I got to Fountain I asked to speak to
Captain Prinsloo. They told me that Captain Prinsloo wasn't present at
that moment. Then I asked them as to whether there wasn't any male who
was arrested. The policemen told me that there wasn't any person of that
description. As I was still talking, standing there, they were taking him
from the back. He heard my voice and they took him out, they took him to
the cars. He didn't see where he was going because they had put a
Balaclava over his eyes. As I was standing there once policeman who was
at the door told me that I must go to Fuchsware to look for my son. They
told me that that is where they always keep our children. I went home to
my

	/husband

husband to tell him what had happened. He left his job at that time. We
went up and down trying to look for my son. We just couldn't get him
anywhere. Others told us that he went to Oosvlei(?). We looked for him
for about three days in Oosvlei, but we couldn't get him. From there
Christopher - that was after three days now. I got a trunk call from
Lesotho from our family. It said, Ma Mohali, please hurry and come and
see your son. I hurried and I went to Lesotho. When I got there ...
(incomplete)

INTERPRETER: The interpreting service shall resume as soon as the witness
is ready. (Pause) --- When I got there Christopher was grievously
assaulted. He said he was taken by Captain Prinsloo, as well as another
policeman by the name of Marapo. He said they had been kicking and
assaulting him. They were saying he must speak the truth because he was
an ANC member because he was attending school in Lesotho. He asked them -
they said he must work for them when he gets to Lesotho. He must look for
the ANC members and inform them. He said he doesn't stay in Maseru, he is
outside Maseru. He doesn't even know where the ANC members are, he
doesn't know anything about the ANC. They continued assaulting him until
he bled through his mouth, as well as his ears. Where there are holes
blood was spilling out. He said they told him to wash the pyjamas that he
was wearing because he had bled on them. He couldn't wash the pyjamas
because he was swollen all over the place. Then they threw him outside
the borders of Ficksburg. As he was there he didn't know where to go. He
was given an emergency passport which says, "I am sick," so he was

	/taken to

taken to Quintu Hospital in Maseru. So they made a passport that he could
go and see his mother, but I was looking for him. Because Christopher
didn't know where he was going he remembered the phone numbers of one of
the members of the family, that is the Maheta family. He phoned the
Maheta family at Apatamayi(?), where they took him to a doctor. They
enlisted the help of a doctor to come and - when I got there I made this
passport in Takastad(?). I showed it to Captain Prinsloo. I said to him,
"Look, I am still looking for my son. You are keeping him here. Where
does this passport come from?" They told me that my son was an ANC
member. I told them that my son was a student and he wasn't an ANC
member, and he wasn't going to tell me what was happening. He had already
assaulted my child. I even said to him my child had died. Then he was -
he took out my son's watch that he had taken earlier on and gave it to
me. Then I told him my son was alive. And I told him that the doctor who
had examined him had told me that if I had the means I could open up a
case, but now I am afraid. I am afraid of the forces that be. Then I left
the case as it was. One day Prinsloo sent me to my son. They said they
wanted to see him because I was asking to take my son back. When we got
to the border - I was with Captain Prinsloo when we got to the border.
They asked my son as to whether he still agrees with what they told him
earlier on. They said they wanted him to work for them. He totally
refused. He said that he won't work for them because they were killers as
they had done to him. He pointed out that assaulted him and he will not
do it to other people, or help them do it to other people. Then Prinsloo
said to

	/me, "You

me, "You are going back to Lesotho. You are never ever

are never ever going to come back to Bloemfontein." So, since 1984 my son
has never been coming to Bloemfontein. He didn't have a passport, he was
staying in Lesotho until when the President, Mr Mandela, came back. It's
only then that he requested that he be made a passport to come back home.
That's only then that he came back.

Thank you very much. I will not keep you very long. --- Oh, I'm sorry,
there's something that I left out. My husband wasn't working because they
were always troubling him. I took the case over because I realised that
they were going to kill my husband. We were in such difficult times. Even
now my husband isn't working. We are still pulling very hard because of
the Afrikaners who were always troubling us. He got work at the location
at Mr Makofane's place. Mafisa and Mpanjani used to go there and go and
insult him where he was working. They used to violate him. Mafisa also
used to harass me at work. He wanted to - he kept on fetching me from
work to ask me some questions. We pulled so very hard as from 1978 until
1991. We didn't sleep at nights. We were being pointed with guns. They
used to refer to us as dangerous people of the ANC. They would knock at
night, kick the doors. Some would even sleep outside. The neighbours were
keeping an eye because they were scared that they would throw a bomb or
do something to us. I don't know what was happening.

Tell me, your son, Christopher, where is now and what is he doing? --- He
is working for the ANC.

Whereabouts? --- He's in Sanlam Plaza.

(Inaudible) ... Bloemfontein? --- Bloemfontein.

	/A final

A final point. You mentioned that your daughter was

very disturbed by all the - the death of her brother, and the torture and
the harassment and so many other things. Has she been into hospital, or
under a doctor or a psychologist? --- Yes, this child went to the
doctors, that is physicians. The physicians referred her to Orange
Hospital, but she never came all right. My brother took her to
Johannesburg at a mental hospital. That is where she became better. I had
already spent a lot of money trying to get her to back to normal, but it
didn't help.

Is she staying with you now? --- No, she doesn't stay with me. She got
married in Gauteng.

Thank you very much. You've been through a horrible experience, and, as I
said earlier, you've been very brave. I have no more questions, and I am
going to ask the Chairperson to take over.

	---------------------

CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much. Any further questions? Dr Mgojo.

DR MGOJO: Thank you very much, Ma Mohali. I am not going to be long too
because I feel that you have undergone a strain derived from your
experiences. I just want to ask just a few things just to fill up.
Somewhere in your narrative you said that when Bokile was arrested he was
kept in a flat. --- Yes, I said that.

Where was that flat, and whose flat was that? --- This was the
Municipality flat in the township. It was called the Native Affairs flat.
We used to call it flat.

Thank you. You said again that the police once asked you to go and fetch
your son in Lesotho, and when you went there you found that he was in a
camp which had

	/nobody,

nobody, and he refused to come back. Did the police ask

you to give a report about your trip since you were sent by them? ---
When I got to the police station I never told them that I had got my son
at the camp. I told them that I had got him from the street.

And did they ask you why he had refused to come back? --- He said he was
scared that they would kill him. He said he didn't want to come back, he
was scared that the police would kill him.

Mrs Mohali, you know that these police were very inquisitive people. The
question I am asking, when you came back, since they knew that you had
gone there, they had encouraged you to go there, did they come back and
say that, "Why did your son refuse to come back?" This is what I want to
establish. They never worried you about why he didn't want to come back?
--- The police, when they said that we must go to Lesotho, they said I
must go to Fountain and tell them as to how I went. Then they asked me as
to where my son is. I told them that he refused. They asked me why. I
told them that he was scared that they would kill him. They said they
wouldn't kill him, he must come back.

(Inaudible) ... your narratives you have mentioned the Security Police. I
am not sure which Security Police they are. You mentioned those from
Thaba Nchu and those from Ladybrand. Were they the SAPs or the
Bophutatswana Government Police, or a mixture? --- According to what they
said to me, that is where he died, they said all the police came
together. It was police from Ladybrand, as well as YB, as well as
Bloemfontein policemen were there, but the most were white people or
white policemen.

	/(Inaudible)

(Inaudible) ... now you know that the Truth

Commission is interested to the families too. How much has this affected
you as a mother, these experiences? --- They affected us so terribly,
because each and every time we were in pain. I even had diseases or
suffered from certain illnesses because of what had happened. We lost so
much due to running from pillar to post trying to trace my son.

Thank you.

	---------------------

You have already heard from Mr Borain how we sympathise with you in all
the troubles that you've been through. It's not easy to comfort people,
but we are trying. Even if we are weak, but we always say let God be the
person who comforts you, let Him be the person who takes car of you,
because the story that you have told us today is a very sorrowful one
that your son had been killed in that way, and thereafter you didn't even
know where he was buried. To add to that the one coming after him was
also tortured as you have indicated.

We want to thank all the women, because they are brave. You women are
very powerful women. You are forgiving, and that surprises us. May God be
with you and your family in this time of trouble. We all know that He is
Emmanuel and He will be with you. We are free today, we have freedom
today, because most people sacrificed themselves. Your children were also
sacrifices. We thank you. May God bless you. We want to thank you.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Mr Kaloti, could you put the earphones on please. You have
your sister with you today.

MR KALOTI: Yes.

MR BORAIN: We'd like to welcome you both, and I know your name, Elvis
Kaloti, is that correct?

MR KALOTI: Yes.

MR BORAIN: I am not sure about your sister's name. Perhaps she could tell
me, or you could tell me your name, or you could tell me your sister's
name.

MR KALOTI: She is Ellen Kaloti.

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Now, are you both going to speak, or just
you, Mr Kaloti?

MR KALOTI: No, she's speaking.

MR BORAIN: She's going to be speaking?

MR KALOTI: Yes.

MR BORAIN: And you as well?

MR KALOTI: No.

MR BORAIN: No. So it's just - okay. All right, that's Ellen Kaloti. I
want to welcome both of you very warmly to the witness stand. Thank you
for waiting. I suppose you wondered if you were ever going to have your
chance. You can hear me all right on the earphones, no problem?
Wonderful. Thank you very much indeed. This is a story about detention,
torture and harassment. That is the story you're going to tell, but
before you do I must ask you to take the oath, so I'll be grateful if you
will please stand.

	---------------------

ELLEN KALOTI (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Commissioner Lyster is going to help you to tell the story,
and I am going to hand over to him now.

	/MR LYSTER:

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mrs Kaloti. I understand that the evidence that you
will give relates to the assault and torture or your brother, Elvis, who
is with you today, and that he has requested you to speak and tell us
about this because you were there when this happened. Can you tell us
that story, and before you do that will you just tell us something about
where you lived, you and your brothers. Just give a short background to
this incident which you're going to tell us about. Thank you. --- We are
staying in 1160 Mogwane Street, Bathu Location. In that year when we have
this pain it was in the evening when the police came in. It was white
police. There were also black policemen, but they were outside in the
van. They knocked at the door, and when they opened they said they were
looking for Edwin. When they knock Edwin said we must hide him. We did
that. When they get into his bedroom we told them that, "This is Elvis,
not Edwin." They pulled him while he was still sleeping. He was beaten
up. He was bleeding profusely through the mouth and the ears. In front of
the door where they were beating him there was some pool of blood. He
couldn't even scream, he was so quiet. We thought that he was dead. One
of the police came inside the house and then he took a bucket of water.
It was very cold in that day because it was winter. He just threw the
water over his body. They took him. They put him inside the van. When I
was prepared to sleep I couldn't sleep, it was very painful, and then I
woke up my sister and then I told her that we must go to Philonomi
Hospital, maybe they are taking him there. Then my sister said, "Let's
go. There was no - the street was so quiet, it was very dark outside. Our
parents said to us, "How

	/"are you

"are you going to reach that place?" I said to my mother, "God is there.
He is going to accompany us." It was like that, and then we went there.
When we arrived at the Philonomi Hospital there were security guards
outside. By that time we were not allowed - if you are sick you are not
allowed to get inside the hospital. I said to her we must just - we must
plan as if I pretend as if I am sick. They allowed us to get inside. When
we were in Philonomi there were police in the passages of Philonomi
Hospital. Then we came back. We met this other girl on the way who is a
nurse in Philonomi Hospital, who asked us what is it that we are looking
for. I told her that - I asked if the police didn't came with a boy who
was bleeding. They said he is inside. And then I said I was afraid to go
in and check, and then she said, "You must go in and check." When I tried
to look one of the policemen was looking at us, and then I had to go back
again ... (inaudible - end of Side A, Tape 2) ... and I couldn't hear
what was going on. I told my sister that, "This is not going to help.
Rather go back home." We went back home. He was in the hospital for three
days. There was - he was unconscious, he was in a coma. We used to go
there just to watch him, and then we'd go back again because we couldn't
communicate. After three months he was still in hospital. On that
particular day when I went to see him I found out the police had taken
him. I went back home and I told them that the police have taken him. We
couldn't sleep at night, even during the day. Even where I was working
the police were always coming too, but each time when they go to fetch me
at work they said to me they are looking for Edwin. I used to tell them
that I don't even know where

	/is Edwin.

is Edwin. Since I last saw him during that particular night I never saw
him again. They were always giving me a hard time. One day they came to
my workplace, they said I must give them Edwin's photos, and I told them
that I don't have Edwin's photos. They said to me ... (incomplete)

INTERPRETER: The interpretation service will resume as soon as the
speaker is ready. (Pause) --- They said to me they knew, they heard where
he is, he was in Lesotho. They said to me I must go to Lesotho and bring
him back. I told them that I don't even know Lesotho and I am not going
there. I don't even have relatives there. I told them that I am not going
there. This Prinsloo came to me. He said to me he is going to arrest me.
I said to him, "Instead of arresting me, I don't even know because I am
not always with the kids, you'd better kill me because I am not going
there." I never saw him again.

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mrs Kaloti. You said Elvis was in hospital for
about three months, and was he discharged after that, and what happened
to him after he was discharged? --- When we were in Philonomi looking for
him we got the message that the police took him. I've been to each and
every police station, I couldn't get him. But what was surprising, there
was this other lady whose children were also arrested. They said even
Elvis was in their case also with her children. She always tell me when
she was going to court, and I went there with the hope that I will get
Elvis. And then I asked where was Elvis. The Judge told the police that
he is somewhere in Bathu. He said they must go and fetch him. They
brought him. When I asked why didn't they brought him before then

	/he said

he said the police were always taking him to assault him somewhere else.
They always asked him where was his brother, whether he belongs to any of
the political organisations, who were those people who were always
recruiting them in those organisations?

And eventually did Elvis come back to the family house? --- He came back
on the day of the case. It was 14 or 16 of them. One of them was released
by the name of Madlathela.

(Inaudible) ... convicted of anything, or was he released by the Court?
--- He was released without any questions. There were no questions that
were asked to him. It was the only children who were being questioned,
because when the police started to visit us they were not looking for
him, they were looking for Edwin, therefore he was the one who was being
tortured.

Just to clarify that, Edwin is the older brother of Elvis, is that
correct? --- Yes, it's true.

(Inaudible) ... the police were looking for Edwin? --- I didn't know the
reason, and I didn't know where were they going to take him to.

Was Edwin a member of any political party at the time? --- He was a
member of the ANC.

And you mentioned a policeman by the name of Prinsloo. Is he from the
South African Police, the SAP, or Bophutatswana Police? --- He was in the
Fountain offices from the Special Branch.

And another witness this morning has also mentioned the word Fountain
Police, and in many of the statement that we have taken from people from
this area they have mentioned Fountain Police. What was Fountain? --- It

	/is a place

is a place where the Special Branch police are posted.

Also you didn't clarify which year this took place, Mrs Kaloti. Can we
just clarify that. When was Elvis taken to Philonomi Hospital? --- It was
in 1979. It was just after a local policeman's house was burnt down, and
his name was Mojaki. He was staying in Malay Camp. On the same night when
his house was burnt Elvis was assaulted. They were actually looking for
Edwin, not Elvis.

(Inaudible) ... at the time of this assault? --- He was 18 years.

(Inaudible) --- Yes, he was still schooling at Lekayi Primary School, and
his brother was in Sifunelo High School.

Has this experience, his assault, has it affected him in any way that you
are able to say? --- Yes, it affected him mentally, because even now he
is at home. He is doing nothing. He is unemployed. Our mother is taking
care of him. She is doing everything for him. Even he is sick my mom has
to take him to the doctor, and every time he is sick we know that it is a
mental disorder. In 1990, it was in December on the 24th, he was
sleeping. I don't know what was happening to him, and I don't know how
did he feel, but he was shouting, and when we got into his bedroom he was
a changed person. And when we asked him what was the matter he fell, and
we called an ambulance to take him to Philonomi Hospital. He was released
the next day on the 25th, and then he wasn't - he wasn't okay. He has a
mental problem if I have to indicate that.

And is he taking any sort of medication for that? --- No, he is not under
any medication.

	/Is he

Is he receiving any grant of any sort, disability grant? --- No.

Mrs Kaloti, do you remember the names of any of the policemen who you
witnessed assaulting your brother? --- I can't remember their names, but
I can identify them.

(Inaudible) ... working, or where they are based? --- I didn't know where
do they live, but what I know it was white policemen.

How did they actually assault him? --- They were hitting him with guns,
big guns, and they were hitting him right on his head. And they used to
point us with those guns so that we can go back inside the house.

And what became of Edwin, Mrs Kaloti? --- Since Edwin left and we didn't
even know where he was until the day when they came and said to me I must
go to Lesotho. That's when I said I am not going to Lesotho. And I heard
that he was in Tanzania until the day he came home again to stay with us.

And is he staying with you presently? --- He is not staying with us.

But is he back in the country, he's living here, is that right? --- Yes,
he is around.

I'll hand over now back to the Chairman and ask if there are any other
questions that other people would like to ask.

	---------------------

CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Any further questions? Dr Mgojo.

DR MGOJO: Thank you very much, my sister. Are there any reasons that
Edwin has been away from home for such a long time when most of the
people were very anxious to get home? That when he is back in South
Africa he does not go

	/home and

home and stay at home? Have you inquired from him why he cannot come back
at home and stay at home? --- I never asked for any reason because I
didn't know where he was. But I wanted to the police where were they
going to take him to, and they didn't tell me where they were going to
take him to.

You said that Edwin is back now. When Commissioner Richard Lyster was
asking you you said that he is back now in the country, and the question
was that is he living with you at home, and you said that no, he is not
at home. Now, it means that now he has got a freedom of movement now
because of the new South Africa now that things have changed. Why I am
interested, is there any reason why he does not stay at home now? ---
There's no reason. It's just that he feels that he is going to stay
wherever he stays right now, because sometimes he is working. He is
working for the Umkhonto we Sizwe, so he decided to stay where he stays
right now.

In the statement here it is said that Elvis Kaloti does not have a
permanent job, and he would like to have a permanent job. What type of a
job would you think that he would do, because you have already said that
he is mentally sick ... (inaudible) --- With hands he can work. Any kind
of job he can do. Things like cleaning. Any job that he is capable of
doing he feels that it's right for him.

Thank you, Sir.

	---------------------

CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much for the evidence that you have brought
forward. We don't know at the moment, maybe the Commission can help as he
is not well. Maybe there is

	/something

something that he can get. As we are still telling the others that God be
with you, and we can also try that we be of assistance to you. Thank you
very much.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Mr Mekwe, can you hear my voice all right on the earphones?

MR MEKWE: I can hear very well.

MR BORAIN: Good. Thank you very much. I can hear you too, so we can make
a start. You are very welcome. We are pleased to see you. You are going
to tell a story about what happened to you, not about what happened to
someone else, and in telling a story it brings back many memories, and
some of those are very painful, and we hope that in the telling of the
story it will not a distressful experience but a healing one, because
please remember that you are telling this story to people who have been
asked by the President to hear what you have to say so that South Africa
can know, and indeed the world can know, what took place during many
years in our country. We feel deeply for you, and so many others like
you, and we wait to hear what you have to say. Before you start would you
please stand for the oath?

	---------------------

RATSEBE JEREMIAH MEKWE (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Mr Dlamini is going to assist you in the
telling of your own story, and I hand over to him now. Thank you.

MR DLAMINI: Thank you, Mr Mekwe. We appreciate the opportunity that you
have accorded us to share your experiences, which go back to 1971. And
before perhaps we could ask clarifying questions can I ask you to relate
this story as it happened. Thank you. --- It was on the 7th of May 1971.
It was on a Friday. I was at work. As I was going out of my office,
proceeding to the toilet, my co-worker called me and told me that police
were

	/looking

looking for me. As I got there I saw quite a number of guys, there may
have been 24 or 25. They were all white and they asked me what my name
was. I told them my name was Jeremiah Mekwe. They handcuffed me, they put
me into the car. I told them to phone somebody and tell her that I have
been arrested. They refused. They took me to the police station. I told
them it was the first time that I was being arrested, I don't know
anything about the police station. They told me about 180 days. As we
came they asked me where I was attending school. They asked me when did I
come to Welkom. I told them it was in 1982. They asked me names of people
that I knew all of them. They said to me I should know these people. They
asked me quite a number of persons. Each time I told them they used to
say the right person, the right person. Thereafter they said I should
show them where I slept. I showed them my bedroom. They took my school
books. They took all these books. I thought I had stolen books. They took
me on a Friday, and Monday they came back to me and said they were taking
me to Virginia Police Station. That is where they assaulted me, they said
I must talk. They said I had said at some stage that I am going to put
all the white people in the sea because I didn't want them. They
assaulted me repeatedly. They took me to Virginia River. They put me into
a sack and they threw me in there. They kept on saying I must speak the
truth, I must admit that I at some stage said I will put all the white
people in the sea. When I went to court I told the Court that all the
things that I had said before I had said them under duress. I was sickly.
Then I was taken to a doctor. I was very much afraid. Each thing they
said I

	/admitted.

admitted, even if I didn't know. They told me that they didn't actually
want me, they wanted six people. They wanted Mr Malema, Mr Rabushaba, Mr
Libenya. There were five actually. They said if I could get all those
people they'll leave me. I said, "Oh, you're hitting me, you're
assaulting me because you want other people." It's only then that they
charged me. I don't know what they were charging me for. In 1971 they
told me that I am supposed to appear in court. When I got there I got all
papers which were alleging that I was a PAC member, I was trying to
overthrow the Government. When we got to court the court was held in
Bloemfontein. Accused No 1 was John Coetzee, No 2 was Lithiyane, No 3 was
Mr Mekwe, No 4 was Rabushaba, No 5 was Libenya, 6 Malema. The three of us
got four years, the other five got five years. On the 2nd of December -
on the second week they told us we should prepare ourselves, we were
going to Pretoria. We saw a Land Rover coming. There was a man who was
speaking Afrikaans. I thought it was a white man, but it wasn't. I saw
this car proceeding upwards. We went in this Land Rover, we went past
Bloemfontein to Beaufort West. When we got there the gentleman who was
inside told me that we were proceeding for Robben Island, but he was
afraid to speak. When we got to Cape Town, in Newland Prison, at 6
o'clock I said, "I am very young. Where are you taking me to?" We got so
many people there. We looked at the blackboard and it was written 1 016.
I was surprised that I could be taken as Robben Island as young as I was.
I regarded that as a misdemeanour, not a serious offence, so I was
surprised why they were taking me to the Robben Island. I met Steve
Tshwete and all the other people who

	/were there

were there. These old men told me, "My child, we can see that you don't
know anything about politics." I admitted that I didn't know anything
about politics. I said to them, "No, I don't know what I have been
arrested for, so I just want to sit and think." They said to me I must
join the organisations because when I go outside I will be harassed by
the police. I ended up joining the organisations. Then they told me that
I was going to do one year in Robben Island. When I went out I was taken
to Pretoria - Port Elizabeth. I stayed for quite a few weeks. They took
me to East London Juvenile Prison. I stayed for a few months. They took
me to Welkom. They took me to Ligwa(?) maximum prison. I stayed for a few
weeks. They took me to Bethlehem. I stayed three days. It was like I had
stayed there for three years, because I was being thrown in and out of
every prison. They took me and they said I was going to be interrogated,
I am going to be taken to Welkom, to Qua-Qua. I was even given a house
there. I asked, "What is actually going on?" because I was being to
another country now. By then the Minister of Justice was Mr Ben Johnson.
He allowed me to come to Welkom. When I got there they were following me.
I got my mother. My mother was sick, she suffered a stroke. My father had
also left the police force because he was sick. I met another gentleman
who said whoever was coming from Robben Island could be helped
financially. He gave me an address as 81 Jureson Street in Braamfontein,
South African Council of Churches. It was still being led by John Rees.
When I came back I was arrested once more. They said to me I was taking
money from the communists. When I came back from there they said, "We
said to you you

	/"must deal

"must deal with the mines, don't get into the towns." They took me
another time. They arrested me for two years. Then in 1977 I said to
them, "If I come out of this prison please don't harass me any more. I
have just had enough of your harassment." Then they took me, they said,
"There comes a communist."

Thank you, Mr Mekwe. I just want to ask a few clarifying questions. You
mentioned that when you were arrested you were too young to understand
what was happening. How old were you? --- I was born in 1946 in January
on the 21st.

And also you said that you were coming from work. What type of job were
you doing at that time? --- I was a clerk.

Can you tell us more about the organisation and the duties that you were
performing as a clerk? --- I used to do quite a number of jobs. I would
be a clerk, an accountant, because at that time they used to just give
you work, just ordinary work, ordinary office work. I was doing quite a
number of jobs. When they see that there's something that - I was also a
storeman. When they see that there's an odd job they would give it to you.

(Inaudible) ...the company you were working for? --- It was Welkom
Engineering.

Thank you. Can you also tell us about your family, the wife and the
children in particular? I know that at the moment you are staying with
your mother. --- I had a wife, as well as kids. When I remember quite
well, according to the old laws when you get arrested the Security Police
would go and tell your wife that she must divorce you because he is going
to die in Robben Island.

	/So women

So women used to listen to that, so when she came back she divorced me.

Thank you. And the children, where are they and how old are they? ---
Since they ran away with their mother I have never seen them. Even when
my father died they never came to the funeral. I never saw them again.

	---------------------

The conviction that was imposed on you by the Court in Bloemfontein, what
was the nature of the conviction? What was the offence? --- When the
Court told me - according to my attorney they said to me I don't know
anything. They said to me I must tell the Court as to how I was arrested.
I told them that I was assaulted, I was never told - I was just told that
I was a member of PAC, I was a member of all those organisations. So the
Court threw away such evidence, they said to me I was vague.

In your opinion what do you think was the real reason behind your arrest
and sentencing? --- That question is a very beautiful question that
should be asked. When we asked the gentlemen with whom I was arrested
there was a Council here in Welkom. This Council used to harass people,
and there was also another Council in 1969. We followed up that Council.
As we were following it up unfortunately the people with whom we were
arrested, Moses Libenya and John Coetzee, they had a book called, "Cry
Our Beloved Country." At the time that book was banned. Now, these police
got this clue that this gentleman who we were attending school with, that
is me, we had this banned book in our possession. Now the police told me
if I point out the people who were in possession of that book they would
release me. Now, I saw it was

	/difficult

difficult because they ... (incomplete - end of Side B, Tape 2) ...
myself how could I have handled such a gun. I don't even know where
Tanzania is. I don't know even know Bloemfontein, I am from Welkom. I
know Welkom. You can ask me about Welkom.

One more last question from myself and then I'll hand over to the
Chairperson. Are you presently employed? --- I am not working at all.
When I work I work only for three weeks, then they tell me that they
don't want me. Now I am working as a volunteer in the offices. I help in
the welfare department, especially in the pensions department, especially
when the white people rob them. I help in so many ways, as well as
grants. Now they help me financially because they know that I am not
working.

(Inaudible) ... Mekwe. I'll now hand over to the Chairperson.

	---------------------

CHAIRMAN: Thank you. We thank you very much. We can see that you are
grown up now. We thank you for the story that you've related to us, and
the manner which you were harassed. We hope that this Commission would
perhaps be able to assist you in any which way it can. We will help. We
thank you very much.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Good afternoon, Mrs Matsunyane. Can you hear me all right?

MRS MATSUNYANE: I hear you perfectly well, Sir.

MR BORAIN: Good. Thank you very much. I would like to say a very warm
word of welcome to you. It's been quite a long morning, and we are
delighted that you are finally at the witness stand and ready to tell
your story, which goes back to 1988 and '89, when your house, according
to your story, was petrol bombed. Before you tell that story, and the
suffering that that brought about, will you please stand for the taking
of the oath.

	---------------------

METABO ADELENA MATSUNYANE (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you, please be seated. Mrs Matsunyane, my colleague, Mrs
Gcabashe, is now going to take over from me and she is going to help you
to tell the story. Thank you.

MRS GCABASHE: Good morning, Ma'am. We are really delighted that you could
come to the Commission. Can you first start and, you know, tell us more
briefly about your family, and thereafter you will tell us about what
happened to your family according to the statement you have given us. Can
you hear me? --- I think I cannot hear you perfectly well.

Can you hear me? --- I will request you to speak a bit louder because I
don't hear you.

Can you please just explain briefly about your family life, as well as
all that happened until now, whatever you've written in your statement.
--- Shortly I can say as from 1988, that is in 1988, I was with my
children in the house. It was towards 10 o'clock. As we

	/were still

were still sitting I was actually preparing them for their concert. Just
before we finished we went into our bedrooms, we prepared ourselves to
sleep. Now, I have a five-year-old grandson, who used to remind me that
we should pray. Just as he started praying he said amen, then we heard a
loud noise, a loud bang on top of the roof. Many stones were being hurled
on top of the roof, as well as through the windows, and the stones were
falling into the house. By God's mercy there isn't even a single stone
that hit any of the children. I stood and held the door. I tried to shake
the door as if I was going to go out just to scare them, but I didn't
actually go out. When we looked through the windows we saw girls and
boys, many of them, quite a group. They were going out of the window.
Some were going out of the gate. When it became in the morning I heard
that these children slept at the reverend's place. That is our elder at
the Catholic Church. That is where that group went to sleep at the
reverend's place. My child woke up. That is my granddaughter, went to the
police station. The policemen came in and they just looked scantily. They
asked what happened. We didn't even know who had attacked us. It was at
night, we couldn't identify any of them. But we slept. We didn't have
windows, we had to sleep using doors to close the windows. We thought
they would come back for us, but well, they didn't come back. The police
did not help me in any way. They just looked and did nothing, because I
said to them, "I don't know who the people were." They were not old
people, they were very young children. They said I should find out who
the people were so that I can open a case. It was in 1980,

	/and in

and in 1989 they burnt my house.

Can I ask you a question? You said it was in 1999. Do you want to say it
was in another year maybe? --- They started in 1988. They only threw
stones, and in 1989 they burnt my house. In 1990 again they burnt. It was
three years consecutively.

Are you finished telling your story? --- I think I was still on the 1988
issue. In 1989 after they have burnt my house we went to the police
station, and the police came and they took photos. They went all around
the house, they took photos, they saw everything that was burnt to ashes,
and they asked me whether do I know those people. And I said to them,
"No, I do not know the people." But there was a boy who used to come and
help me at home. I would send him to go and fetch me water with a barrow,
and he told me, he whispered to me who the people were. And the police
were also there at the time he was telling this story. I regretted the
fact that I took his name to the police because he was severely assaulted
and he had to run away from his home to go and stay in Lesotho. He left
schooling. He was a young boy. I was so hurt, my heart was troubled, and
I said to myself it could have been better if it was my child. I felt
sorry for this boy for what happened to him. He came back home after
quite a long time. The police would take me and put me into the van
together with him, and we would drive around the township in the B
Section, and they would say to us, "Point the boys who did this to your
house." But this boy couldn't identify any one of them. I didn't know one
of them, but I had to be in the van every day they were conducting their
searched. And I was then

	/accused

accused - the boy was then accused, because they said to him, "We saw you
in the police van. We saw you with the police. You were going to tell
them that we burnt Mrs Matsunyane's house," and they would assault him
and they would harass him. In 1990 I was sitting in front of my house,
and I called another neighbour so that we can go to a funeral. While we
were still talking, discussing this issue of going to the funeral, I saw
a group of young people coming, and they stopped right in front of my
house. It was in the afternoon at about 4 o'clock. And they made a
circle, and after that they talked. It was right in front of my house,
and I said to this woman, "Let us go and sit on the stoep." We didn't
hear anything that they were saying. Then they dispersed. They chased
away the young ones, they said, "Go, go." The young ones went off, and
the elderly ones stayed behind and they were talking. After a while they
dispersed and they all took different directions. I said to this woman,
"I am now scared. I have asked you to go to the funeral with me, but I am
not relaxed at all. Can you please go," and that woman left. It was on
the 16th of June. The same night we heard bombs. It was just after we've
enjoyed our supper. My house was surrounded, but luckily nobody was
injured in that case. All the things in my bedroom were burnt, but
something surprising - there was a small table. We used to put a Bible on
that table, and some few books. This table was burnt into ashes, but the
book, the Bible, was not even affected, it just fell on top of those
ashes. It was not affected by the fire. Even the police, the sergeants,
were pointing - were looking at this, were showing the others, because
there were ashes, but the

	/Bible fell

Bible fell when the table was burning, but the Bible was not burnt. It
was a long story. I lost everything. I was mentally disturbed. The police
even in that case did not help me. Everything ended up nowhere. I didn't
find any assistance of any kind. I think I am finished.

We thank you, Mrs Matsunyane. I think you've said everything you wanted
to say. --- Yes, I think I have finished everything I wanted to say.

And we are grateful to hear that your Bible was not affected in that
fire. It shows exactly the grace of God that is for each one of us here.
I have a few questions to ask so that we can get clarity on certain
issues. If I listened to you carefully you said you were busy preparing
yourselves for a leader who was to come. Do you know the name of the
leader? --- I think it is Dr T K Mobede.

The second question that I still want to ask.

INTERPRETER: The speaker's mike is not on.

MRS GCABASHE: Can you please tell us what was this ... Dikwankwetla(?)?
--- Are you asking me who were they? 	Can you please tell us briefly
about Dikwankwetla? --- I have to tell you that I was so fond of the
Dikwankwetla. It was a party.

I didn't quite understand you. --- I think I have a problem with my ears.

Did you hear my question? --- Can you please repeat your question.

In your statement to referred to a party called Dikwankwetla. Can you
tell us a bit what this party was all about? --- I stayed in Thaba Nchu
for quite a long time. I didn't have any place to stay for quite a long

	/time, and

time, and every time I would go and find a place to stay they would refer
me to Qua-Qua. I didn't know anything connected to politics, I wanted a
place to stay like a mother who's got children. I didn't want to be
lodging all over Thaba Nchu. Now, this Dikwankwetla party gave us a place
to say in Butsabelo, and I decided to join. There was no any good reason
to follow this party, but I wanted a house to stay in and I joined them.

You stayed in Butsabelo? --- Yes, we stayed in Butsabelo. We are the
first people to stay in Butsabelo.

You even further said that the children who threw stones at your house,
who burnt it, went to stay with the reverend, the father at the Roman
Catholic Church. Do you remember the name of the father? --- His name is
Mr Motsula.

Now, these children who burnt your house, did you have an idea of whether
they belonged to any party or not? --- Yes, they were the ANC. Yes, they
belonged to the ANC.

If I may ask you a question. Is there anything that you would like the
Commission to help you with, even if we don't have those powers? --- I
lost so many things, and being a single woman without a husband I would
request the Commission to help me with the house. I would like my house
to be repaired, and if I can be given money so that I can buy the
furniture that got damaged. Because even at the police station they have
information regarding the value of the furniture.

The last question that I have. The policemen you reported this matter to,
were they the Bophutatswana Police or the South African Police? The
police station

	/that you

that you went to report this matter to? --- It was a police station in
Butsabelo.

Were they the South African Police or Bophutatswana Police? --- No, they
were not Bophutatswana Police, they were Butsabelo Police.

Thank you very much. We have listened to your story, and then I will now
take everything back to the Chairman so that he can conclude.

	---------------------

Mother, I just want to pursue that question which was asked by Mrs
Virginia Gcabashe about the children who burnt your house and they were
kept in the mission of a Roman Catholic father. What was the connection
between this father and the children? Do you know of any connection? ---
I don't know. I don't know their relationship. I was told by his child,
because he woke up the next morning early to come and tell me that the
youths slept at his home.

Did this father know that these children were involved in burning
people's houses? --- I don't have any information. I don't know whether
he knew that these youths were burning houses.

You never complained to him, asked him why he was keeping the people who
were burning? --- I went to him. I went to him after receiving the news
that the youths slept over at his house. He also came to inspect my
house, and I told him, "I heard that they were overnight at your place."
He said, "Yes. While I was sleeping I heard a group of people getting
into my house, into the bedroom where my children were sleeping," and he
could hear them saying, "Can you please switch the lights

	/"off," and

"off," and they switched the lights off. They all slept at his house.

To put the record straight maybe, so this was not the Catholic priest. It
was the Catholic elder, not the priest. Is that true? --- It was the
Catholic elder, not the priest.

	---------------------

CHAIRMAN: We really feel with you for the tortures that you have been
through, and we try to explain to people that this is a Commission that
has been put in place to listen to the different stories of our country.
We don't want to put anybody aside. We have to listen to both sides and
then we have to understand that people suffered a lot and they were
harassed. Some of them were harassed by the police, and some of them were
harassed by the ANC and some other parties. As the Commission we have to
find out the truth, and then we have to listen to all people. 	I am
trying to say this, that even if we are listening here we are not allowed
that if a person belongs to a different party then people should now
start groaning, because if that is the case I will have to clear this
hall, because we are here to listen to different stories from different
people. If a person is a Nationalist Party we have to listen to him. If
he is white we have to listen to him, because we say this is a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. You do not reconcile with your friend, you
reconcile with your friend you hated before. Now, the President of the
country has put us here to listen to everybody. I am now requesting that
we do not react when we hear the stories that we don't associate
ourselves with. We don't have to feel any bad at all.

	/By so saying

By so saying I want to say to you, Mrs Matsunyane, that we feel sorry for
what you have been through. We don't mind which party you belong to, but
you have the right to come before the Commission, you have the right to
get a sympathy from our side. As we have been saying throughout, we would
ask God to be with you, we would ask Him to console you. We want to thank
you.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: (Inaudible) ... to see you. You have a story to tell about
your son, who died in very mysterious circumstances, and we are going to
listen very carefully to your story. It is a story full of grief, because
to lose a son is very painful. I would ask you please to stand to take
the oath.

	---------------------

ERICA DOREEN MOTSABE KOKUNSI (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much indeed. Mrs Kokunsi, Dr Mgojo is going to
lead you as you tell your story, and I hand over to him now.

DR MGOJO: Can you speak Zulu or Xhosa? --- I speak Sotho.

Ma'am, just relax and be free to tell all what you want to tell the
Commission. Don't reserve anything. This is your only chance where you
can tell your pain. Can you please tell us about your family and the
background, and when you have finished then tell us about this story,
what happened? --- I was married in Zeerust. I am talking about something
that I didn't declare in my statement. My surname was Mnisi. As I was
married in Zeerust I stayed at home for 11 years, staying with my mother.
After my mother had died - during those 11 years of staying at home I had
a person that I got involved with because my husband had left me for
quite a long time. That is Lindikile Mnisi. I had two children. As I was
still at home after my mother had died I asked my boss - there was
absolutely no life at home, so I asked my boss to get me a house in
Rockland. My boss couldn't get me a house in Rockland until I got this
partner that I got involved with. I ultimately got divorced. Thereafter I

	/went to

went to stay in Rockland with my partner. We had a child, a son.
Thereafter my son, Lindikile, I don't know whether he realised that we
didn't have a life, so he wasn't very impressed. My son disappeared.
During that time of his disappearance I heard stories that he was in
Botswana. They used to name it Munsiwa at that time. I think my child was
staying quite well with his stepmother. When he came back he was totally
destroyed. When he came back I tried to do some cultural cleansing so
that my child could be fixed. That is our culture, it's part of our
culture. Then he became fine. He went to night school, he attended night
school, because at the time he left he was in standard seven or eight. As
he was still attending this school he disappeared, and we didn't know
where he went to. That was in 1976. That is when he started disappearing
and reappearing. He would disappear for quite some time without us
knowing where he was. At some stage I heard that he went with his
friends. That was two children, Mr Madiba's children. They went with my
son, they went to Lesotho. As I was preparing myself to go to Lesotho to
go and see my son I met Mr Shele. He told me that he had met my son and
my son had asked me to send him a denim or a jean. He told me I mustn't
go to Lesotho any more because they had gone to Tanzania. That very night
I just couldn't sleep, I was crying, because I was preparing myself for
Lesotho to see my son. Since then I haven't seen him, since they said he
went to Tanzania. The very same year I was surprised when they
inaugurated the President Mandela they said our children who had gone
would come back. I was looking forward that my son would also come back.
I saw all the children had come back to

	/Bloemfontein.

Bloemfontein. I went to ask. There is another one who was a friend to my
son. I asked this boy as to whether my son was coming back or not,
because all of them had come back. I wanted to find out where my son was.
This friend told me that I shouldn't actually bother myself, because if
my son wanted to contact me he would contact me, because he is alive.
Then I went to Mrs Muthibi at UB Centre. I asked Mrs Muthibi whether they
couldn't help me to look for my son, because since he went to Tanzania
all the other children had come back, but mine hadn't come back. Way back
in 1990, especially 1995, my younger child told me that she had met Basi
Muwadira. She told me that my brother had died. I felt very had because I
didn't know what was happening, and apparently our children do drink or
take intoxicating liquor, so I didn't know what happened. Now, as we were
told that we tried to make a follow up. I met Basi. Basi told me that my
son, Lindikile, had died. I tried to ignore him, and I told him that all
the children who had died were brought back to be buried by their parents
and their loved ones. How come my own son wasn't coming back to be
buried? Even Basi's relative - all the children were buried in
Bloemfontein, so my son should also come. I want to bury him, so I don't
believe that my son is dead, or my child. Muwadira came to me. He
explained to me. He said he was always scared to come and tell me. He
told me that he didn't have a good life because he wasn't working. Then
he tried to get work. Then he even got a partner. Then now he has joined
the police force. On that day, it was quite a few months ago, I felt my
shoulders going down, I felt very depressed. I prayed that the Lord would
try and

	/heal me

heal me because I felt as if there was a hole in my heart, because now it
was dawning on my that my child had died in 1985. But what surprised me
was I didn't know what had killed him. They alleged that he was killed by
malaria, but now how come I didn't get a report as to where he died? That
surprised me quite a lot. I don't have anything further to say.

Thank you, Mama. Thank you for your narrative. I am just going to ask
just a few questions. You spoke about a certain Machel who brought a
message to you from your son in Lesotho. Who is this Machel, or who was
this Machel? --- His name is Shele, but I have forgotten his surname.
Shele, that's the name. I just made a mistake because I never went around
looking for their names or trying to get their names. I didn't get enough
time because I had to come to the Truth Commission, and I just didn't
have the energy or the means. Even at yesterday my bosses released me so
that I can prepare myself for the hearing. I was a little bit mentally
disturbed. I feel like I am going mad because I don't know where my son
died. Maybe if I could know where his corpse is and what killed him I
could rest. (Pause) I have got no more questions. I just want to know how
can you help me to know the whereabouts of my son or his corpse, because
since he died in 1985 I don't know anything about him.

	---------------------

MR LAX: Thank you, Mama. Just one small question please. You mentioned a
friend of your son's that told you that he was still alive and that had
known him in Tanzania, but you didn't tell us the name of that friend.

	/Could you

Could you please, if you can remember, tell us that name? --- That friend
is Basi Muwadira. He told me that my son had died in Tanzania. He said he
had heard it from the other ones. When I think I just cannot understand.
It's as if they are trying to hide something, as if my son had been
killed or something had been done to him, but nobody is prepared to own
up. They said he was killed by malaria.

(Inaudible) ... try and look into the matter for you.

	---------------------

There are no words that we can use to heal your wounds, and there are no
words that we can use to heal a broken or wounded spirit, but we would
like you to accept our comfort, even though the words cannot measure the
pain that you've gone through. You've gone through so much pain. There
are two things that affect you emotionally - because you don't know what
happened to your son. That's the most devastating. Maybe he died, and he
died a long time ago, but you don't know, you don't have any details as
to how he died, or where he died. You've got no testimony as to what
killed him. You've got no evidence whatsoever that confirms as to whether
that is true or not. The second one is that you don't even know whether
he is really dead, and if he is where are his bones or his corpse.

This Commission shall try by all means to help you by asking the ANC
whether they can explain or elaborate or give any knowledge whatsoever as
to what happened. But during all times that we are trying to help you, to
see what we can get with regard to your son's death, we ask

	/the Lord

the Lord to be with you and your family, to strengthen you, to comfort
you and console you, to give you His grace. Thank you.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: I'd like you welcome you. You've had a long morning, and I
understand that Mrs Thapedi is a little tired and would like to go home
as soon as possible, so we have brought you forward. Mr Thapedi, I
understand that you are going to tell the story about your son, and that
if there's anything else that needs to be said then Mrs Thapedi will
confirm that or add her own views and understanding of that. Is that
right?

MR THAPEDI: That's fine.

MR BORAIN: Fine, thank you. You're very, very welcome, and you have a
very difficult story to tell, and we feel for you very much as you start
to tell that. Would you please stand for the taking of the oath, and you
can both stand together.	

	---------------------

MR AND MRS THAPEDI (Sworn, State)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Please be seated. My colleague, Mr
Lyster, is going to take over from me, and he will guide you as you tell
your story. Thank you very much.

MR LYSTER: I also welcome you, Mrs Thapedi and Mr Thapedi, and you, like
many other people who have given evidence today, and who will be giving
evidence over the next two days, are telling about the loss of a family
member, a grandson and a son, and we know this is a very difficult burden
to carry and we express our sympathy to you. Mr Thapedi, I think you, as
the Deputy-Chairman has said, are going to start and tell us about your
son and his death. So if you are able to give a little background as to
where you live, how many children you have, that sort of thing, what
motivated your son to go into exile,

	/and then

and then the story, as far as you know it, of his death, you are now
welcome to start. --- Thank you very much. Thank you very much. I thank
you for giving me a chance to give evidence, because I am the one who
knows about my son. I have three children. Two of them have passed away.
One of them was schooling at Larago. I was working outside, outside the
country. When I came back I got Mary, who told me what is happening at
home. My son was born in 1962. It happened because of some of the
conditions that my child can go away, go to Lesotho. When I tried to
follow him I was longing to see him. When I was in Lesotho I got his
file. They told me that he is in Tanzania. Even the message that I got in
that office of the Interior I was told not to follow him. I was told not
to follow him always. I was told that we will see when he comes back. Now
I have a request. I am here to request the Commission to help me. I am
not even sure - because I have been told that he died I am not sure
whether is he the right person who had been buried. I heard from people
who were talking. It was on the 18th in Paper Street in Haydida(?). An
ANC spokesperson said that a person had been shot, and I didn't know that
it was my son and I couldn't even think whether was it my son. After
quite some time - I think it was a year - I heard this from people when
they were talking. I was told that the person who had been shot was my
son. You know it's difficult to believe in rumours. I am now appealing to
the Commission to help me so that I can be satisfied. My heart is not at
ease, because when he left he was still alive. I won't be satisfied for
seeing the bones only. Now I didn't want to say too much, I want to be
very short. I am going to

	/briefly

briefly give you some of the few things as well. The first thing that I
want the Commission to do for me, I want to know how was my son buried,
because the family was not even informed. The ANC, together with the
previous regime, they should compensate me. I don't know what are they
going to do, but they have to compensate me because I am deeply hurt. I
want them to come closer to me and investigate this matter, because I was
only given the bones, and it's hard for me to believe that it was my son.
The family was not informed, as I have already mentioned. The previous
regime only buried my son without my consent. I am not totally satisfied.
They should try, both the ANC and the previous Government, they should
come up with something so that I can be satisfied. I am not satisfied as
you see me now. The rest you will hear from my mother, because she has
got something to tell you. And I also want to pass my condolences to all
the people who suffered the same thing. I am referring to the people who
lost their loved ones. It's not only me who came across such a thing. I
sympathise with everybody who suffered. I want to thank you, and I will
expect anything from the Commission. I want his belongings, because I
also heard that he had a few belongings. It's impossible - if you die as
a person you die and you leave the loved ones behind. I want to put
matters clear. I heard again that he had a car. I want the investigations
to be done thoroughly, and if there is a car it has to come back home. I
don't want to say anything. There are so many of us who have to give
their evidence. May God please add to what I didn't say to you today. I
think I will end up there. Thank you.

	/Thank you,

Thank you, Mr Thapedi. We will certainly try and investigate what
happened to your son, but I want to ask you one or two questions. You
said that he was buried by the State. Where was he buried? --- The ANC
did some investigations and they managed to get his bones. I didn't even
know when they were busy doing those preparations. I only knew later that
it was my son. They brought me his remains and we buried those remains,
and I don't want to go further by exhuming the body. That I don't want. I
think our enemies should tell us exactly what happened because I don't
know, I am in the dark.

(Inaudible) ... body was exhumed and reburied. From where was it exhumed,
or don't you know that? If you don't know that just say you don't know
that. --- They exhumed the body in Pahameng Cemetery.

(Inaudible) ... Pahameng? --- Pahameng, it's one of the townships in
Bloemfontein. You go straight - you go past Rockland and then on the
left-hand side that is Pahameng location.

And who was it from the ANC that assisted you to - with that process? Do
you remember the person who assisted the family to exhume the body, and
for the body to be reburied? --- I still remember him. His name is YT
Mohapi.

And you mentioned in your statement that someone from Bloemfontein, a Mr
Mdewe, Oupa Mdewe, had notified you of your son's death and your son's
burial, is that correct? Mr Mdewe works at a pharmacy, he's a pharmacist,
is that right? --- Yes, he was also involved, but the person who gave us
a clear indication was YT Mohapi.

After you son went into exile, after he went to

	/Lesotho

Lesotho and to Tanzania, did you hear from him after he had gone there in
1982? Did he make contact with you? --- I personally went to Interior and
I found his file there, and I was told that I am late. They didn't tell
me how late I was, but they told me that he was now in Tanzania. I
personally went to the Interior.

(Inaudible) ... formal death certificate indicating that the person who
was buried was in fact you son? Do you have a death certificate like
that? --- I tried to find a death certificate, but the previous
Government didn't take me into consideration. But the evidence that my
son died is there, because there was a funeral service.

As far as you know there was never any inquest or any sort of court case
about the death of your son. Is that right? --- There was no court case.
We were never called.

Thank you, Mr Thapedi. I am going to ask any - hand over to the
Deputy-Chairman to see whether there are any other people who want to ask
questions, and then we will go to your mother and ask whether she will
confirm what you have said.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: I wonder if I could suggest that we ask the mother to speak
first, because she may be able to give the ... (inaudible - end of Side
B, Tape 3) --- The police came to our house and we were sleeping, but he
was not there, I must say. They interrogated me. They wanted to know his
whereabouts. You know, when they come they would come in large numbers,
and each one of them will occupy an entrance, and they would even stand
at the windows. I am saying he is my son because I raised him up, and I
said

	/to him,

to him, "Can you please leave these people because they will end up
killing you," and he said to me, "It doesn't matter whether they kill me
or not." We received a death certificate from the church. They asked me
whether do I know that Abel Lethaba had died. I didn't follow the death
certificate, but I was told that it was a death certificate from the
Anglican Church. They took photos of him. I have the photos with me. You
can have a look at them if you want to.

Mrs Thapedi, were those photos taken after he had died, after your
grandson had died? --- The photos were taken when we unveiled the
tombstone. I have the photos with me here. And the death certificate. You
can take them and have a look at them. Even today I have never heard
anything. I have never heard anybody coming to tell me what happened to
my son.

Mrs Thapedi, thank you. We will definitely have a look at those documents
after you have given your evidence. Are you satisfied ... (intervention)
--- Can you please bring the documents.

Are you satisfied, or are you not satisfied, that the person - that the
body that you exhumed and reburied was your grandson? Are you satisfied
that that was your grandson? --- I was never satisfied. He died here and
they didn't even tell me when they buried him. I don't know anything.
Where are those photos?

(Inaudible) ... absolutely sure you get them back. I promise you. Mrs
Thapedi, so what you would like the Commission to do is to investigate
how your son died, and whether the body that you exhumed and reburied was
in fact your son, is that correct? --- I was never satisfied

	/with the

with the bones. Those were not the bones of my son.

Mrs Thapedi, the Commission will do whatever it is able to do to try and
investigate that matter and to try and clear up this confusion, this
mystery as to the death of your son. I now ask - unless you've got
anything else to say I'll ask the Deputy-Chairman to ask the other
Commissioners whether they would like to ask any questions.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much, Mr Lyster. Are there any other questions?
Yes, Dr Mgojo.

DR MGOJO: Just short questions just to get the whole picture of this. Mr
Thapedi, you said that you were working outside the country. Was it
Lesotho? --- I think I've toured the whole country, but there are parts
of the country that I couldn't reach, especially the very violent areas.

You said in your story when you wanted to follow your son, when he had
left, you were told that you must not follow him. Who are the people who
said that you must not follow him, and did they give you the reasons why
you should not follow your son? --- Yes, they gave me a reason. They said
he will end up at the hands of the police. And then I thought to myself
this is true, because I don't know who was really after his back.

Thank you. The last question but one about the exhumation of the body.
Did you ask these people that they must exhume the body of your son when
this process took place? --- Yes, I agreed with them because I wanted to
be satisfied. Because I couldn't go to anybody to complain. I thought my
heart would be at ease, but I

	/have realised

have realised that I am not satisfied at all. I am still not satisfied,
because he left in one piece, but when he came back he was in pieces, he
was in bones. I don't have any evidence whether have we buried the right
person or not. I think I have already said that I don't want us to go and
exhume the body, it's not necessary, because we have already put a
tombstone, but I must say the enemies must come forward and they should
confess so that I can be satisfied. If they tell me a different story I
might be satisfied, but at this moment I am not.

(Inaudible) ... last question. You said during your testimony that you
received a death certificate from the church, and even suggested that it
was said that it was from the Anglican Church. Do you know which church,
where it is situated, and who is the priest - or who was the priest or
who is the priest for that church? --- We didn't follow this issue. We
only knew that it was from the Anglican Church.

Any reasons, Mama, why you didn't follow it, because this is an important
thing. You get this certificate, you are hurt, your son has been buried,
you're not sure that it's your son, and then you get a clue that it is
the church which has buried him. Was it because of fear or what that you
didn't follow this when there was a certificate? --- I was scared. I was
afraid of following up this matter, and I didn't do anything. You
wouldn't say any word. As the father of this child I went to the mortuary
to find the death certificate, but they didn't give me any clue. We have
to get the death certificate at the mortuary, but they couldn't give me
one. I even went to the police to find out what happened,

	/and they

and they said, "We don't want to involve ourselves with people who
skipped the country." It was difficult because nobody wanted to listen to
me. It was difficult for me then.	

Thank you. --- I think I wasn't at home when my mother received the
latest news and the death certificate. I have tried my best. I have been
to places to find help, but no help was given to me, and she only
received it by post.

Thank you, Sir.

	---------------------

MRS GCABASHE: Mr Thapedi, can you please go back when you said something
about the exhuming of the body. When you exhumed the body was there a
doctor, or was there a person who could tell you whether those bones were
those of your son? --- No, they didn't want me to get that kind of
information. I want to tell you - that is at the mortuary. I was only
shown the bones, and I saw them at the mortuary, and that was the last
time. Even when they were at home I didn't want to open the case to have
a look at the bones.

	---------------------

MR LAX: Mr Thapedi, attached to your statement is a burial order that was
given to us. Firstly, can you confirm that this is a copy of the burial
order that was actually given to you? --- We received that letter very
late. That person was just telling me that he will give me an information
as to what happened to my son. Even the names that are on that letter I
do not know them. Those are fictitious names. I know my son's names. He
is Abel Thapedi. Those are just fictitious names. I do not

	/know them.

know them.

One other question. Who is the person that actually gave you this letter?
--- I was given the letter by YT Mohapi. He called me to the ANC offices
and then he gave me the whole in formation. The documents we got them
from him.

(Inaudible) ... follow up with him about that. Thank you.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Mrs Thapedi and Mr Thapedi, your son and grandson died under
very mysterious circumstances. One of the worst things is not to know,
not to be sure, and you have heard my colleagues tell you that we are
going to do everything we can. We will try and talk with Mr Mohapi and
also with Mr Mdewe, and we will do everything we can to establish as much
of the truth as we can, and as soon as we do we will be in touch with you
again.

In the meantime we give to you our love and our condolences in the loss
of your son. We have noted your requests. We will do everything we can to
assist, and we trust that God will give you strength and grace to
continue. And thank you again very much indeed for coming.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Good afternoon, Mr Olifant. You can hear me all right?

MR OLIFANT: Yes, Sir.

MR BORAIN: No problem?

MR OLIFANT: No problem.

MR BORAIN: Excellent. Thank you. A warm welcome to you. Thank you very
much for coming. In a minute I am going to try and guide you as you tell
your story, but we need for you to take the oath, so will you please
stand.

	---------------------

SHADRACK THEKO OLIFANT (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Please be seated. I hope you will feel as
relaxed as is possible in a setting like this. It's a very big hall,
there are lots of people. Some of us you don't know, but we are here on
behalf of the nation, appointed by the President to hear your story, and
I hope you'll feel very relaxed in telling that. Now, you are Shadrack
Theko Olifant. --- Yes, Sir.

Tell me just a little bit about yourself before you tell the story of how
you were tortured and when it happened. You may start. --- My name is
Shadrack Theko Olifant. I used to tout the youth for the ANC, and I used
to canvass school children or students. I was working under Steve
Bohatshu. On the 29th he came to me in the evening. It was 2.00 am. When
Comrade came to me he told me that the police were looking for them. I
went with him. He stayed next to the shops. He asked me to get into the
shop and do his important things. He gave me money. I went there and took
certain things. He told me that he won't be in for the following
afternoon at the

	/shop. He

shop. He owned the shop actually. So he told me where I would get him. He
went away, he left me. On the 3rd police came. I was at the wholesale to
order some stock for his shop. I was the only one who knew where he was.
All the other people didn't know where he was. As I was in the wholesale
buying the stock there came three Afrikaners. When they got to me they
arrested me. I was pushing the trolley, because the students were using
the shop to eat their lunch. They asked me where my friend was. Then they
made me leave the trolley. They arrested me, they took me to the shop.
The children or the students who were eating there at lunch time were
also arrested. They believed that I was working with the students.
Another one was an elderly man. His name was Mr Mohumutsi. The children
were assaulted. I got other Afrikaner-speaking people who were in the
office. The office was inside the shop. They asked me why I was in the
shop, why I was busy in the shop if Steve wasn't there. They also
assaulted me. They said I knew where Steve was. They searched the shop.
There are certain things that they got, but I don't know particularly
what the things were. Then they went away and they left me. It was during
the day. In the evening when I went back home I heard that the police
were looking for me. I asked my mother why were they looking for me. Then
I went to the Comrades with whom I was living. I told the Comrades that
they were looking for me as well as them. In the evening I went to
Comrade Steve. I told him the events of the day. I had to look for a
place to stay, I couldn't go back home. Thereafter the Comrades with whom
I was working, that is the Vulamasango Comrades, they were also

	/wanted.

wanted. All in all we were 22. We went to stay at my grandfather's place,
all of us.

Whereabouts is your grandfather's place? Which town or which township was
it? --- He stayed in Bloemfontein. We stayed there with the other
Comrades. We also had female Comrades. We were all wanted. We stayed with
my grandfather. We could only go during the night or in the evening.
During the day we had to stay inside. He used to run up and down getting
us food and whatever we needed, because we couldn't get out because we
were still being hunted by the police. We were hunted until the 6th of
April 1986. It was approximately 1.00 am in the morning when the kombis
came. They took us into the kombi. We drove in the kombi and we got to
Ladybrand. When we got to Ladybrand we got into the farms in Ladybrand.
My grandfather is the only one who knew the Lesotho route. As we were
travelling we saw poles and we realised that we were towards a soldiers'
camp. And the soldiers sort of dispersed and they allowed us to get some
space to move. We moved in between them. It was late at night, it was
2.00 am in the morning. Others were able to run away, but I was amongst
the ones who were arrested. Some of the Comrades came in the morning. We
stayed there. We started to plan that we were going to pretend that we
were a religious group. We told them we were a religious group, we came
by church or we had some church affiliation, until the soldiers took us
to the soldiers' camp in Ladybrand. That's where we were assaulted. They
even changed our names. They told us different names that we should
address ourselves in. As we were still in there they kept on calling us
into certain rooms. We kept on

	/being

being assaulted. You would just feel somebody kicking you, you wouldn't
even know who was kicking you. Thereafter they called the Ladybrand
Special Branch. When the Special Branch came they took us to the
soldiers' camp. From the soldiers' camp they took us to the police
station. It was then in the afternoon. It was a Monday on the 6th. We sat
there up til they transferred us to Bloemfontein. When we got to
Bloemfontein they took us to Ramkraal. They also took us to the Fountain
Police Station. It was black policemen as well as white policemen. They
put us into a certain room. When we got into that room they took me and
Jewel Makubalo out. Jewel was my co-accused. They were accusing both of
us. Then they took us to separate rooms. That's where they started
torturing us, assaulting us, violating us. They wanted Steve. They wanted
to know from me where Steve was. I told them that I didn't know where
Steve was. Then they asked me where was I going, because they arrested me
during the day and I had told them that I didn't know anything. They
closed us there and they kept on assaulting us until they told us that I
was - they told us that I was the one who was involved more than the
others because I knew where Steve was. So they sort of separated us. They
charged the other ones with terrorism. On the Wednesday I was assaulted,
I couldn't see, my eyes were swollen shut, and two policemen from the
location came. The other one is Tsilwani, the other one I have forgotten
what his name is. They asked me where are the other ones. I told them
that we were very scattered, we were at different places. The person who
was killed was the person that we were staying with. His name was George

	/Musi. I

Musi. I said I didn't know anything about anyone who had died. Even my
family wanted to see me, but the police had hidden me. Nobody could see
me until my mother came to see me. She asked me whether I had killed my
grandfather. I denied that. She told me that according to gossip I had
killed my grandfather. I said I don't know anything about that. The
murder case never went forth. The other cases of terrorism and the rest
went forth. Mr Blakey and Mr Foreman accused me and Ober. The policemen
turned all the other corps Comrades into State witnesses so that they can
testify against us. When they got into court they could not go further
with the testimony because they said it was forged. Then it was a whole
lot of confusion. We were in and out of court with the fabricated
statements and testimony. The person whom they said I had killed was
suspected of having killed my grandfather. There was gossip that I and my
friend had killed my grandfather, but according to our knowledge we left
him intact when we went away. From there the case started until it got to
an end. When it went to the end Mr Soman(?) took me to my uncle because
my life wasn't safe in Butsabelo. So I went to my uncle. My uncle was a
traditional healer so he wasn't staying at home, he used to go in and out
of the place. I went back to my mother, and her life wasn't quite well
because they used to chase her also. I didn't know what I would do
because the police would still come searching for me. They wanted to get
Steve. They always wanted Steve from me. Thereafter I went and enlisted
some help from the Comrades, only to find there were no Comrades. All the
Comrades that I knew I had lost contact with. Now I was constantly
assaulted until my uncle stood up.

	/Thereafter

Thereafter they continued coming, they continued harassing my mother. At
times they would come and search the place, saying they were looking for
weapons, they were looking for guns, and I would tell them there were no
guns there. Even at night they would just come. I would just be taken to
an office. Even if I hadn't done anything they would just put me in that
office without eating, without doing anything, just sitting. Thereafter
they would just chase me away and say I must go, so they did that
continuously quite several times. The policemen that I can remember it
was Captain du Plooy, it was Nick Swanepoel, it was Lieutenant
Terblanche, du Plessis. They were the people who kept on harassing me day
in and day out. Even when I got arrested I went to a mental hospital.
That mental hospital was in Orange. I stayed for one month in Orange and
I kept on seeing these people who were harassing me. There was another
nursing staff nurse. At some stage I saw Swanepoel and Mafisa, and the
staff nurse told me that I was wanted, so they tried to change my room.
That is where I was admitted. I was taken and put into another room
because she had told me that they would come looking for me. I went to
Thaba Nchu. They fetched me from Thaba Nchu and brought me back. That's
where I'll end.

Thank you very much. There are a few questions which I'd like to ask to
make sure I understand your story. First, just to help me, what was the
name of your grandfather? --- His name was George Musi.

Thank you. Now in 1986, when you and your fellow Comrades tried to leave
the country, how old were you then? --- I was 26.

Now, you mentioned that you were first picked up by

	/the soldiers

the soldiers and you were in a soldiers' camp, and then the Special
Branch came and they took to you a police station in Ladybrand, and then
on to - back to Bloemfontein. That's right? And where you were badly
assaulted in the camp, but also at the Fountain. Now, you were charged,
were you, under the Terrorism Act? Were you ever found guilty, or were
you acquitted, or what happened? --- The police were looking for the
Comrades. The Comrades when they got to court they never testified
according to what they told the police, or in accordance with what they
told the police.

(Inaudible) ... what happened at the end of the trial? Were you just
dismissed, or did you spend time in gaol? What happened? --- The case
just ended there and they just released us. As we were free we continued
being harassed despite that the case just ended there.

But you were badly harassed, but you were never put back into gaol? ---
After we had finished in court we were taken - I was taken to my place. I
never went back to prison. I was taken to Rockland.

Now, you were very worried because some people thought that you had been
responsible for the death of your grandfather. Now, your grandfather was
the one who helped you, who looked after you, and then you left to try
and cross the border. What did the - there was no court case about the
death of your grandfather? Was there no trial, or nobody accused of
killing him? --- No, there was never any court case. It was just talk,
common talk, that I killed him. It was just a rumour, and that's where it
ended as a rumour.

(Inaudible) ... did he - was he shot, or was he

	/assaulted,

assaulted, or knifed, or how did he meet his death? --- My father was
woken up in the morning. Apparently he was shot and doused with petrol
and set alight.

(Inaudible) ... feel badly because people thought that you were involved?
--- Yes. Even my family, my father's family. I can't get to them because
they always have this suspicion that I killed my grandfather.

We've heard that - and you've named a number of names. Amongst the names
that you've mentioned were those who harassed you, or arrested you, or
were also - were they some who beat you up and gave you electric shocks
in prison? --- It's Nick Swanepoel and Terblanche. They were the ones who
violated me, who assaulted me and electrocuted me.

Thank you very much. You've had a very rough time, not only because you
were assaulted and beaten up, but I think the dark cloud which has hung
over you about your grandfather, and we will do what we can to try and
help. But my colleagues may have other questions, so I am going to ask if
they would like to ask any more.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr Olifant, you, like others who have
given statements and who will give testimony tomorrow, have talked about
Fountain, where the Security Branch had their headquarters. Was it at
Fountain that you were tortured by means of electric shocks and beatings?
You did mention another place in Bloemfontein, Ramkraal. --- Yes, from
Ladybrand they took us to Ramkraal. At Ramkraal that's where they just
keep people. It's not a prison, it's not a police station. From there we
were taken to Fountain. That is

	/the Special

the Special Branch. That's the office of the Special Branch. We were
taken there. That's where we were tortured. But they kept on torturing us
from Ladybrand up to here. That is the soldiers now who were doing the
torturing.

How did they administer electric shocks to you? --- What they did, they
electrocuted my private parts. The other one switched on the light. The
other one kept on asking, "Do you want to tell us where Steve is?" I kept
on telling them that I didn't know where Steve was. They kept on
electrocuting me, telling me that I should tell the truth, until such
time that I lost consciousness. They were using these electric shocks.
They were also strangling me with a towel.

(Inaudible) ... a towel round your throat, or was it a bag over your
head? --- They were actually strangling me. The other one was holding one
end of the towel and the other one was holding the other end of the
towel, and each one was pulling to different sides. That's when I lost
consciousness.

	---------------------

DR MGOJO: Thank you, Sir. Mr Olifant, it would appear that what is more
hurtful is the accusation that you murdered your grandfather, even more
than the tortures you received in those police stations. You just made
one statement that it is suspected that the person who said that you
killed your grandfather is the one who killed him. Can you say something
more about that? --- I didn't hear that quite well. Could you kindly
repeat it.

In your statement, your narrative, you said that it is suspected that the
person who said that you killed your 	/grandfather

grandfather is the one who killed him. Is that correct?

--- That was a rumour that was circulating at that time I was being
tortured, but I got it thereafter that the actual person who was involved
was the person I was related to. He was pointed out, but I didn't have
any information as far as that was concerned. I only was told that later,
because when my grandfather died I was arrested, I was in custody. I was
in custody at that time. We were arrested on the 6th, so I wasn't there
when he died. So that person was telling me - the one who was torturing
me told me that he was going to kill me like my grandfather. At that time
I didn't know what he was referring to. I only discovered it later on.

The last question. I am just going around this thing. You have said in
your statement that some of your Comrades became State witnesses. It
means that they were working against you now. Do you think that maybe
they are the ones who spread this rumour that you killed your
grandfather? --- I don't think it's them.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Mr Olifant, we have already expressed our sympathy to you for
the treatment you have received. I hope very much that your family will
become re-united, that they will accept you back, and that they will put
behind you and behind them this ugly rumour that has caused you so much
pain. We, on our side, will do everything we can to try and see what we
can find out about that, and thank you again for coming, and may God
empower you. Thank you. --- Thank you, Sir.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Mrs Motsaneng, good afternoon. Can you hear me all right?

MRS MOTSANENG: Yes, I can hear you.

MR BORAIN: That's good. Sometimes we have trouble with the headphones,
but today it looks as though we're really doing very well indeed. Thank
you so much for coming. You have waited a long time today, and there are
still others who are waiting, so we would like you to tell your story and
what happened - and particularly what happened to your son, Ernest. But
before you do that I would like you to please stand for the taking of the
oath.

	---------------------

DIKALEDI ADELAIDE MOTSANENG (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Please be seated. There are so many from
this part of the world who had sons, and sometimes perhaps daughters I
suppose, or fathers, or mothers, who went into exile, and there seems to
be such a mystery surrounding some of their journeys, and indeed their
deaths. That's part of the story that you are going to tell, and Mr Ilan
Lax is going to guide you now. Thank you.

MR LAX: Thank you, Mr Motsaneng, for coming to talk to us this afternoon.
Before I take you through the story could you just confirm - your son was
born on the 1st of March 1962, is that correct? --- Yes, that's correct.

Thank you. Could you tell us a little bit about your family and where
you're from? --- My name is Adelaide Motsaneng from Bloemfontein,
Rocklands. My child, Matzifiso Motsaneng, was born in 1962. He was
schooling at Ikalelo in 1980. In the morning we discovered that he was
not there. We asked ourselves what

	/happened

happened to him. We went to work. After work he was still not there. We
asked his brothers. They have been looking all around, asking the
friends. They didn't know him. Before work in the morning the father
reported to the police that Matzifiso is not there. His boss - his
father's boss said that he must first go to the police and report. His
father went to the police and report the matter. The police told him to
look for his son, and they'll also help him to do so. Until the other day
the police came and told his father to go to Lesotho, his son will be
there. They made arrangements, passport for his father to go to Lesotho.
Matzifiso was not - the following week we went there. Both of us had
passports to go and look for him. We went to Lesotho and we find him
there. We talked to him and said he must go back home. Matzifiso said,
"Mum, I am not prepared to go home because I know that the police are
going to kill me there." He told me to bring him a bag. There's nothing
else he would like to say. I went to buy a bag. It was on December. I
took the bag to Lesotho. He told me that, "Mum, I am going to school." I
said, "Matzifiso, you are going to school. You know that your father
doesn't like all this situation." He was doing standard eight then.
Matzifiso left in December 1980. He didn't even tell us where he was
going. After that we heard nothing from him. We never received any
letter. All what was happening was we were always having regular visits
from the police. They were looking for Matzifiso, and they were also
telling us that they were going to help us to look for him. In 1982 his
father passed away. I was left alone. I was expecting anything from
Matzifiso. Unfortunately I didn't

	/get anything

get anything from him. In 1990 some young boys from Angola they brought
me some message from Matzifiso. They told me that they were with
Matzifiso in Angola. After that letter in 1990 some boy came to my place.
He actually sent his sister to tell me that Matzifiso said I must phone
him. I asked myself, "How am I going to phone Matzifiso because I don't
even have his numbers?" She assured me that she's got these numbers, she
is going to help me. She said I must also phone him 11 o'clock, but
before 11 o'clock he wasn't in that particular place. One day, it was on
a Saturday, this girl came. She said he is going to help me to give me
the numbers that I can be able to contact Matzifiso with. He came and he
gave me those numbers. I managed to talk to Matzifiso, and he asked me
where his father was. I said, "Matzifiso, your father is not around," and
then he asked me if his father is in town, and I said, "No, he is not
available." He asked me another question again, if his father is no
longer coming around. I told that his father passed away in 1982. He kept
quiet, and then he said that he is sorry and he'll be coming home soon,
but he told me that he's got a car and a house there. Then he told me
that when he has sold the cars and the house he'll be coming back home.
After that I never heard anything from him. In 1993, when I was off from
work, children told me that - it was on June. They told me that the ANC
people were at home. They never came that day, and even the following day
they were never there. On a Friday they came. They find out I was not yet
home. They told the children that they must tell me that they were there
to tell me that Matzifiso has passed away, and they were in a hurry, they
couldn't wait for me

	/because

because they were going to Brandfort. The children were left crying until
I got home. They told me that Mr Malebu was there to tell me that
Matzifiso has passed away. I thought that Mr Malebu will come back again
to tell me how did this happened. He didn't come the following day.
Instead he was there on a Monday. He told me that he left a message with
the children, but he was in a hurry, he was going to Brandfort to tell
the other parents about their children. I said, "Mr Malebu, that was not
right. You were supposed to wait for me. You were not supposed to leave
that kind of a message with the children. You were supposed to wait for
me and tell me." He told me that Matzifiso had passed away, and they are
still making some arrangements for him to come home. On that particular
day when Matzifiso passed away it was the day when he was supposed to
come to Bloemfontein. I was so surprised. On a Monday he came. They were
still preparing in Angola for the body to come home. On a Tuesday other
ANC people came again to tell me that they are preparing, together with
Luanda, for a child to come home. Every day these people were always
coming to my place with different stories, and I told them not to come to
my place again because every day they are telling me all the painful
things. Every day they are coming with different stories. They must only
come when the body is here, because the body was in Gauteng. The other
day they'll tell me that the body's in Namibia. All the stories about
Winnie Mandela in Namibia and Luanda. They will tell me that there's a
fight in Angola, they won't be able to bring him home. That happened from
the 23rd of June until the 23rd of July. It was always all those
different stories. That's why I

	/decided to

decided to tell them not to come to my place any more. As the days goes
by I asked for those days - I asked for a lift at work. I told my son to
go to ANC office in Gauteng to ask what was happening about this body,
because I was getting tired of getting their different stories. So one of
my sons and my cousin went to Gauteng in ANC offices to ask about this
body. When they were in the ANC offices they were told that the body is
only coming from Luanda. They went back home again. They told me all.
They told me that the flight is still coming, the body is in Gauteng with
the - they didn't know when the body will becoming to Bloemfontein. On
the 17th of July Mr Zandi, who is working at the mortuary, he came home
asking for the photo of my son. He wanted to make some arrangements for
funeral. It was already becoming late. I asked Mr Zandi, "Where is the
body of my son?" and then he said, "They are still preparing. If the body
has arrived I am going to call the family to go and identify." On the
19th or on the 20th Mr Zandi brought a kombi and he told me that he is
prepared to take us to the airport to see the body. The aeroplane was
coming at 2 o'clock in Rockland. We went to the airport. When we were at
the graveyard in Heidedal the kombi was stopped. The kombi was turned
back. The hearse was from the Heidedal Cemetery. And then we followed it,
and then we all arrived at Zandi's place. The box was taken out of the
hearse and it was my son's body. They asked us whether to open the box or
not. We said, "Yes, you have to open it so that we can see." They tried
to open. We were together with the two ANC people. The other one was
called Macdonald. Macdonald was together with the other one, and he said,
"We are not

	/going to

going to wait here. We have to go to the hospital because we have to see
one of our Comrades who had been shot." We were puzzled. How can these
people leave us here? As the family we were left behind. The people at
the mortuary opened the coffin, and they asked me all the signs that I
know on his body and I told them everything, even the marks on his teeth.
He was badly damaged. They closed the coffin and they took us back home.
I asked the people, "If a person is your soldier what happens to his
belongings?" They said to me, "Don't worry. The people who are behind are
busy taking all his belongings and they will be brought back home. Don't
worry." I was not worried, knowing that his trousers, his jackets, will
be brought back home. Even today they were never brought to my house. I
am now requesting the Commission, I want to know - they arrived in
Johannesburg and there was a boy who told me that according to the ANC my
boy was not supposed to come alone at home. There was supposed to be at
least two or three. I want the Commission to investigate how did my son
die, because this one who was in Gauteng was called in to come and tell
about Ernest's death. Now, this gentleman in Johannesburg said they were
in a house and it was in the evening. Now, this one from Gauteng went out
and he discovered that there was an exchange of words. And when he went
back to the house he found my son lying on a pool of blood. Now, I want
the Commission to find out happened, how did my son die? This should be
investigated. The information will be received from the other person in
Johannesburg. He told me that they took him to a clinic and he even paid
$1 000,00. They were together with another girl.

	/Have you

Have you finished what you want to tell us? --- Yes, I am finished.

Can I just ask you a few questions to clarify some aspects please? This
person who told you about this words and finding your son's body, do you
know his name at all -the person from Johannesburg? --- I do not know his
name, but I think the ANC office in Gauteng will know his name.

Now, together with your son's body there were some documents which came
back which you've given to us. Do you remember those documents? --- Yes,
I have the documents.

We have made copies of those documents. You're aware of that? Now, one of
those documents is what appears to be a death certificate in Portuguese.
--- Yes. I asked them. "These papers are written in Portuguese. I don't
have any idea." They said, "Keep them safe. Just before the funeral is
over we would have changed those into English," but it never happened
that they changed the documents.

Well, perhaps we can get that done for you. Apart from the story of an
exchange of words and your son being found outside in a pool of blood, in
your statement you also tell us that someone else told you that your son
had a stroke. Is that correct? --- The ANC people told me that my son had
been killed because he had stroke. I asked them, "Is it possible that you
could die of stroke and his bones be broken?" because he had a fracture
in his bone.

Now, you told us about - sorry, before I move on, who in the ANC - do you
know who the people were who told

	/you your

you your son had a stroke? --- It was Mr Malebu who told me that my son
died of stroke.

Now, you spoke about two or three people that should have come back with
your son. Who are these people you are talking about? You said he wasn't
to come back alone, but he was to come back with two or three other
people. --- It's what they told me, that if one is supposed to come home
he can't be alone, there should be two of them or three of them.

You don't know what that means? His friends, or his family, or people of
that kind? --- I think they are talking about the Comrades.

You don't know whether your son had any - a wife maybe in Angola, or any
children there? --- He was staying with a girl and they had a kid.

Have you had any contact with them at all? --- I have only photos. I
don't even know her and she doesn't even know me.

I've also been led to believe that the police in Angola were
investigating your son's death. Do you know about that? --- The Comrades
told me so. Even Macdonald told me.

(Inaudible) ... had any further reports about that investigation? --- I
got only one.

(Inaudible) ... there's nothing coming through. --- I have never received
any report from him, and nobody ever came to me to tell me what happened
to him.

Thank you. We can possibly follow that up for you. Thank you, Chairperson.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Is there anyone else

	/who would

who would like to - yes, Dr Mgojo.

DR MGOJO: Just one question, Ma Adelaide. In your question just now you
have mentioned - you have made mention of a girl. There's a girl who gave
you Matzifiso's - your son's telephone number when he was out of the
country, and then there's a girl who stayed with your son, and they had a
kid when he was outside the country. Is this one girl or two girls? ---
The one who had the telephone number stays here in Bloemfontein, and the
one he has a child with stays in Angola.

This one in Bloemfontein, do you know how she came to know about your
son's telephone number? --- The Macdonald that I have referred to is the
brother to this girl. He is the brother to this girl.

Thank you, Sir.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Any further questions? Thank you very much. What we have
discovered so many times on this Commission is that the situation in our
country, particularly in the 1970s and 80s, was so turbulent, so much
conflict, so much confusion, and so many young people leaving the
country, trying to resist the system at the time. Many of them have come
back, and it's very, very hard for people like yourself, whose son was
away for such a long time, you hardly ever heard a word, and then you
have a promise of him coming back and then he doesn't come, and you wait,
and when he does come it's a body in a coffin, and you don't understand
what happened to him, and that's perhaps the hardest thing of all.

And my colleagues have already told you that we are going to do
everything we can. That is why we ask the

	/questions.

questions. Not because we are inquisitive, it's just that we need to know
so that we can help you. We will try our best, and we will do everything
we can to assist, and once we've made the inquiries, and when we have
some information, we will come back to you.

Thank you very much for coming, and I hope that in the telling of the
story something of the burden that you have been carrying for so long
will be in a small way lifted. Thank you very much.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Mrs Jakila, we welcome you, and can I make sure that you can
hear me through the earphones.

MRS JAKILA: I can hear you.

MR BORAIN: Loud and clear?

MRS JAKILA: I can hear you clearly.

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. If you can put the mike as close to her
as possible please. Mrs Jakila, we have been talking this afternoon about
not really knowing sometimes where our loved ones are and what happened
to them. Your situation is about the disappearance of Andries Gorape, and
you're going to tell us about that in a moment. And it's a long time ago,
but I am sure it's very, very painful for you still. Would you please
stand to take the oath before we start.

	---------------------

BERNICE JAKILA (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Please be seated. Mrs Jakila, my
colleague, Mr Dlamini, is going to help you as you tell us the story of
your son's disappearance. Thank you. Mr Dlamini.

MR DLAMINI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mama Jakila, thank you for the time
that you have accorded us. I would request you to tell us your story. It
is a painful story, as the Chairperson has said already, but for us to be
able to make an attempt in helping you it's only when you try and tell us
as clear as possible, giving us all the clues that you think will help us
to assist you. Thank you, and may I request you to start telling us about
the circumstances around which your son disappeared, and any other
relevant information that you think would be of use to the Commission in
order to help you. Thank you. ---

	/In 1964

In 1964 I moved from home and I went to Gauteng. I left my children with
their grandmother. As I was in Gauteng I heard that my children were also
in Gauteng, but I was staying in Orange Grove, where I was working as a
domestic worker. As they were still there in 1976, when there were riots
or uprisings in 1976 in Soweto, after about a few days Jeremiah - that is
his brother - came to ask me where Andries was. I said I didn't know
anything because I was staying at Orange Grove. He told me that nine days
has lapsed since he disappeared. I told him I hadn't seen him. I told him
to go back to the location to try and find out, because I could not go
out. We were being arrested in terms of the pass laws. But I went to the
police stations in town. I went to John Vorster Square. When we were
still coming they just chased us away. They told us that they knew what
we wanted and they were not interested to assist us. I went to Number
Four. They also refused to help me. I went to Modder B Prison. There they
tried to look at their documents, as well as files, but they said the
couldn't locate him. That is when I felt I couldn't get him. I had a hope
that when the others were coming back he was also going to come back. As
time went on I realised that he wasn't coming back. I was now reaching my
tether, because I just couldn't get any help. Right now my heart is very
sore because I don't know what is happening to my son, or what happened
to him. I don't have any more to say.

Thank you, Mrs Jakila. Perhaps a few clarifying questions. When you say
that you were hoping that your son was going to come back together with
others who were returning to the country, is it because you were under the

	/impression

impression that he had been on exile? --- Yes, I thought so, because he
wasn't the only one who had disappeared from Soweto. Quite a number of
kids had disappeared, so I thought the was part of them, or he was one of
those who disappeared, but I really didn't have any clarity.

Thank you. Did you have any clues from his friends or people who were
close to him as to when they last saw him what he was doing and where he
was? --- His brother, that is Jeremiah, I urged him to try and find out
in Soweto as to what happened to his brother. Then he came back and told
me that they said since he went to work in the morning, and there's
nothing that they heard from him thereafter. Even today we haven't heard
anything, not even the slightest rumour or clue.

From his brother, Jeremiah, was he involved in political activities or
youth activities? --- I really don't know because I wasn't staying with
them. But what I know is that they had just arrived in Gauteng and he was
only 16 years old, he didn't have a pass or an identity document.

Thank you, Mr Chairman. Can I hand over to you?

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Any other questions? Mr Lax.

MR LAX: Thank you. Mrs Jakila, did your son, Andries, have any nicknames
or other names that he might have used which might help us to trace him?
--- His nickname was Baba. That's what we affectionately called him.

Might he have used a different surname maybe? --- He was using Gorape.

	/Your other

Your other son, Jeremiah, where is he at the moment? --- Jeremiah is in
Thembisa at the moment.

So our people could maybe speak to him and try and get some information
from him. --- Yes, but I don't have his full address. I am not really
sure where he stays, but I know where he works.

Perhaps you could give that to our people later if that's possible
please. Thank you.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Thank you, Mrs Jakila. It's 20 years ago. It's very hard to
get any information from what you have told us. You are still in the dark
today as you were then, but, you know, it occurred to me once again that
when we had this uprising in 1976, where so many young people went into
exile, or disappeared, or were killed, or were in gaol, and like so many
mothers you, when you heard about the disappearance of your son - it
becomes almost like a refrain, almost like a song. "I went to the
prisons, I went to the police stations, I went to the hospitals, I went
to the friends, and I couldn't find him." It's a very sad song that many,
many mothers have had to sing, and we feel deeply for you.

We can't make promises that we can't keep, but we will try. We will try
and do whatever we can to see if we can find at least what happened to
that young 16-year-old. Thank you very much for coming, and may God
comfort you in your loneliness. Thank you.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Mrs Butsibo, would you please identify yourself. Have you both
got the earphones on?

MRS BUTSIBO: I am Paulina Butsibo.

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. So you must be Ester Tsetsi. I hope I'm
pronouncing the name correctly. If I am not please forgive me. The reason
why we have asked you to come together is because you both lost your
sons, and they were both killed on the same day in the same event, the
same incident, so we thought it would be helpful to hear your stories
together. Mr Lax is going to guide you in a minute, but again it was
1992, after the President was released from prison, after many people had
come back, and it's very tragic - but that is your story, and we'd much
prefer to hear from you. Would you both please stand together to take the
oath.

	---------------------

PAULINA BUTSIBO and ESTER TSETSI (Sworn, State)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Please be seated. Mr Lax.

MR LAX: Thank you, Chairperson. Good afternoon and greetings to both of
you. --- Good afternoon, Sir.

If we could start with Mrs Butsibo first, and just -if you could tell us
a little bit about yourself and about your family, and if you could just
confirm your ... (intervention) --- I'll be very brief, I'll tell you
what I know, because I wasn't staying at home, I was working in Sasol. On
the 22nd of July, round about 5 o'clock, I got a call from New Vaal. My
mother had phoned my relative's child, and my relative's child was scared
to phone me. She waited for her husband to come back, and the husband is
working in New Vaal. When her

	/husband

husband came he is the one who phoned me and said, "Aunt, Granny says you
must come together with the kids." I was working with my daughter. The
schools were closed as they are closed right now. Now my granddaughters
and grandsons were with me at work, so I took them with. My husband died
in 1986. So the children were with me. Now, when I asked how did they
expect me to come with the children, what was the matter, what had
happened, she told me that she didn't know what had happened. Then I told
my boss. My boss said I must phone Heilbron and speak to my mother. I
phoned Heilbron, I asked to speak to my mother. My mother came. I asked
her as to why she wanted me to bring all the children, what had happened?
My mother answered me, she said she is scared to tell me, but I must come
home. She told me that Champagne had been shot on the legs. I said to her
she must explain to me. She asked me whether I was strong enough. I told
her I was strong enough because I had encountered such experiences
before. Then she told me that my son had died. I couldn't finish
speaking. The phone fell down and I collapsed. My boss or madam picked up
the phone. She gave me some cold water to drink and she took the phone,
she tried to phone my daughter, who was working on the Third Street at
Vaalbank. She phoned Mrs Kelly to let my daughter know that her brother
had died. When I regained my consciousness I found that my daughter was
there already with the two children who had visited us, as well as her
madam was there. They phoned - my boss phoned my husband. Round about
half past six they came back from work. (Pause)

As soon as you're feeling better we can continue. --- When I regained
consciousness I discovered that my

	/daughter

daughter as well as her madam and my grandchildren were there. It was
quite a tale in the street where I was working. She came with her madam,
who was comforting her, as well as the children. Now they were going to
take us in a kombi and bring us to Heilbron. When we got to Heilbron,
that was my daughter and the grandchildren, we arrived at night, we
discovered that there were no taxis, there was absolutely no transport,
and I met another gentleman that I know from the NCD. Then he took us and
he gave us a lift to our place. On the morning of the 23rd I woke up
together with my mother. We went to look or find out where Champagne -
that is my son - where did he die. I got a pool of blood there where he
had fallen, where he had died. The blood had already dried. I took a
shovel and I took this blood and put it in a plastic. I took it with.
Round about 10 o'clock I took my daughter, as well as her aunt. We went
to the police station to see the deceased. When we got to Mapetla we saw
Comrades. They blocked us, they said we shouldn't go there alone because
the Afrikaners were angry in the town, so we wouldn't be able to get into
the town. So we went to Mr Mabena's place. Mr Mabena promised to take his
car and accompany us to the police station. We went to Mr Mabena's place.
We stayed, we waited for each other. From there they gave us a lift to
the police station. When we got to the police station I got that my son
had died. He was bleeding through the nose as well as the mouth. I will
end there momentarily. Now the witness is Mzimbi Moloi, but he hasn't
come.

This witness you talk about, is that a person who actually saw what
happened to your son? --- I was at

	/work. I

work. I just heard that they were together, that is Mzimbi and my son.

How old was your son? When was he born? --- When he died he was 25 years
old. He was born in 1968 on the 5th of May.

Thank you. Have you receive any documentation with regard to your son's
death, any death certificate, or do you know of any cases that might have
happened? --- What I got was a death certificate. I do have it. I got it.
In 1993, on the 23rd of February, I got a letter which said I must go to
court. They also phoned me and asked me whether I had got the letter. My
boss released me so that I could attend to this matter. I told her that
on the 23rd of February I am supposed to be in court with regard to my
son's death. I went to the court. Our names were called, but nothing
happened. Even the person who shot my son, that is Ronnie Mudikwe,
there's nothing that he said.

(Inaudible) ... was this? --- That was in Heilbron.

Since then have you heard anything more about the case? --- There is
nothing I ever heard thereafter. Up til today I know absolutely nothing.

(Inaudible) ... will look into that and be able to try and get back to
you with what actually happened about that case. Chairperson, just for a
moment, with your guidance, should we proceed with the other statement
before we ask questions, or do you think we should ask questions at this
stage? I will just wait for your instructions.

MR BORAIN: I think it would be more helpful to the

	/witnesses

witnesses to continue and then have the questions afterwards. It's a very
painful thing this. And also we might be able to get a little more
information and save duplication. Thank you.

MR LAX: Thank you. If we could turn to you now, Mrs Tsetsi. If you could
tell us firstly about your son, Kipi. How old was he when this event
happened? --- He was 14 years old when this happened. It was 12 o'clock
in the afternoon. He was just playing outside. He said he was scared to
roam around the location because the soldiers were... (incomplete - end
of Side B, Tape 4) ... the other street. I got a car on that street. I
asked that person, the driver, to give me a lift and take me to the
hospital. We got to a main road, where we met people from the Civic
Association. They were coming from the court and they were in a kombi.
They said to me, "There is my son," and they told me that my son had been
taken to Mapetla. That's another location. They gave me a lift. I thought
I was going mad a that time. I didn't know what was happened. When we got
to Mapetla we found that there were police cars as well as police
Casspirs. They took me there. When we got there they said - the Comrades
requested the soldiers to disclose the whereabouts of my son. They said
they didn't know the whereabouts of my son. Thereafter they said the car
had turned at Izulu Street. By that time we tried to follow it. Then they
said, "No, there it is. It's speeding up, it's going towards town." Then
they put me again in the kombi, they said, "We must follow these people."
We followed them. All of a sudden they disappeared. Then we rushed off to
the hospital. When we got to the hospital, as we were

	/crossing

crossing the railway station just approaching the hospital, we saw an
ambulance flicking its little red light. When we got to the hospital I
asked the ambulance drivers as to where my son was. I don't know who
started by telling me that my son was in Kroonstad, but there was a group
of people. I asked them, "How could my son be in Kroonstad within five
minutes?" They told me to go back home, and I was a little bit mixed up
because I didn't know what was happening. They took me, they put me into
the kombi, they directed me to go home. When I got home I sat there, and
my mother asked me where my son was. I told her that they had told me
he's in Kroonstad. I sat outside wondering. Now I was totally - I didn't
know what to do because I didn't know what was happening. Then my mother
said to me I must just wait and see. Nobody showed up except for a young
girl whose name was Busisiwe.

(Inaudible) ... please take your time. (Pause) --- These children came.
They had brought my son's T-shirt. It was soaked with blood. I took the
T-shirt and asked, "Where is my son when my T-shirt is like this? How is
he?" Then they said a policeman shot him. I took the T-shirt and soaked
it in water. I lifted the T-shirt up and I saw quite a number of holes in
the T-shirt. Then I started to wonder how is my child if a T-shirt can be
so full of holes. I went to sleep. Round about 7 o'clock in the evening I
woke up and went to another member of the Civic Association. When I got
to him I said to Mr Ndio, "Where is my child?" He told me that we were
going to try and hire the car and go to Kroonstad. Approximately at 9
o'clock I saw the kombi. They said I must go to Kroonstad. I said they
must take my sister as well as my

	/other son,

other son, because I wasn't able to go. Then they went to Kroonstad. As
we were sitting until 3 o'clock, at 3 o'clock they came back. They looked
at me. Each and every one of them just looked at me. Then I asked, "Is he
dead?" They said, "Yes." I asked whether he was in Kroonstad. They said
no, he wasn't at Kroonstad, they said he was in Heilbron. I asked them
how did they know that he was in Heilbron. They said the Civic
Association members phoned to try and find out where my son was, so they
went to Bloemfontein. They actually threatened the police. They told them
that, "If we don't get him in Bloemfontein you are going to be in
trouble." When they got there we didn't know what to do, we just stayed
for the whole morning until dawn. I couldn't sleep. I was told to go to
the police station to go and report that my child had died or had been
killed. I went to the police station. There was a man who was working at
the mortuary. He was also expecting me. When I got there they pulled my
child's corpse. I stood there in silence and I looked at my son. He had a
lot of holes in his body. Blood had seeped out of his back. He wasn't
even wearing a T-shirt. This gentleman asked me whether I was satisfied,
I had positively identified my son. I said yes. My sister said she wanted
to see if it really was him. Then she wanted to find out about
post-mortems, as to where they should be taken for a post-mortem. She was
told that they were being taken to Gauteng for a post-mortem. My sister
told them that they must know that we are also going to take him to a
pathologist, who was going to try and find out the cause of death. They
told us that we would get the corpses on a Thursday. They took the
corpses. The

	/corpses

corpses came back. We buried them. From there we stayed until 1993.
That's only then that we were told about our children. They told me that
my child had died due to loss of blood. That was all they could tell me
about my son.

Are you finished, Mama, for now? Can I just confirm something with you?
You received a letter to come to court to an inquest hearing. Do you
remember that? --- Yes, I did get the letter.

Did you actually go to court? --- Yes, I did go to court.

What happened there? --- When I got to the court we sat there. We were
read a Bible, a very big Bible by the Magistrate. From there he told me
that my child had died. He told me that he had lost blood. That's all
that he told me.

Do you remember when - what date that was that you went to court by any
chance? --- It was on the 23rd in 1993.

Thank you. This person that you spoke about as a witness, Busisiwe Moloi,
is that the Busisiwe you're talking about? --- Yes, it is the Busisiwe
that I have been talking about, Busisiwe Moloi.

And do you know where we could find her if we wanted to get some
information from her? --- She stays in Heilbron, but she ran away because
she was scared to come and testify. I did let her know that I was going
to come and testify, but she never turned up.

Do you know of any other possible witnesses we could talk to? --- I don't
know of any other people. Busisiwe knows those people.

Thank you. Have you received a death certificate in

	/relation

relation to your son's death? --- Yes, I did get the death certificate.

And you've just confirmed for us that he was at Heilbron Hospital where
he was treated and where he died. --- Yes.

Thank you, Chairperson. Thank you, Mrs Tsetsi.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Thank you. Anyone else? Yes, Mr Dlamini.

MR DLAMINI: Thank you, Mr Chair. Also under the same point of witnesses,
according to Mrs Butsibo's statement there is a name of Fosewa Mputhi
that is mentioned. Can he be one of the witnesses who could help us in
investigating? --- Yes, he is a witness.

Do you know his address where we can contact him in case we need to talk
to him? --- I am not really sure about his address, but I believe that
the person who was taking the statement took all the particulars of the
witness.

One more question to Mrs Tsetsi. It's of concern that your son reportedly
died of excessive bleeding, and when one looks at the times as recorded
in the statement, between the time that the incident took place when he
was shot and the time that he actually got to hospital, can I confirm
those times, because it looks an unusually big gap. What time was he shot
roughly? --- He was shot at about half past 12. Then he went to the
hospital at approximately one - approximately one.

So he was not shot in the morning? --- No, he wasn't shot in the morning.
He was shot during the day.

Thank you, Mr Chairman, I was concerned because according to the
statement he is reported to have been

	/shot in

shot in the morning, and only to be admitted at half past one. Thank you.

	---------------------

DR MGOJO: Chairperson, some of the questions have been articulated by
Brother Mdu Dlamini, but I just want to check whether maybe it's my
hearing which was wrong. Paulina mentioned one of the witnesses as Mzimbi
Moloi. Is there any person like that, or maybe I didn't understand what
... (inaudible) --- Yes, that is true, it is Mzimbi Moloi.

Is there any reason why in your statement you didn't write him as a
witness, because in your document here you wrote as a witness Fosewa
Mputhi? --- I do not know of any Fosewa Mputhi. I know Mzimbi Moloi. On
the 13th when the Truth Commission was in Heilbron Mputhi was there.

(Inaudible) ... correct this document so that we put the right witness.
Thank you.

	---------------------

MRS GCABASHE: Mrs Butsibo, according to your statement you talked about
Mr Mapena. How is Mr Mapena involved in here? --- Mr Mapena was a
Comrade. He is the one who was helping us to run up and down, go to the
police stations to try and find out what happened.

Thank you.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Either of the two witnesses could answer this one. You said
that at that time there was shooting, the soldiers were shooting in the
townships. Do you know what was going on at the time in the township? Why
were there soldiers there and why were they shooting at people? --- At
that time there wasn't much. It was just the Sasol

	/students.

students. Now all the Comrades were trying to sort out

their matters, their organisation's matters. They had been arrested. Now
we don't know who called the Casspir from Harrismith. They just came and
shot, but there wasn't any altercation. There was absolutely nothing that
- the policeman said they were stoning his house, but that's unbelievable
because it was just a quiet march. Our children were killed by the
Heilbron police. That soldier made a mistake of taking him around the
location. That's how he lost blood or bled excessively.

You think that he was shot, and then he was put in the Hippo and they
travelled around with him while he was still alive in the Hippo for some
time, and only after some time they took him to the hospital. --- Yes,
that's what I said exactly.

And you said that when you examined his body, when you identified his
body, it was evident that it had been rolling around in the Hippo because
it was very, very dirty. Is that correct? --- Yes, I said that.

Now, this policeman, Shidiso Hlongwane, do you know where he is? Or is he
a soldier or a policeman? A policeman. --- It's a policeman. I don't know
where he disappeared, because he is no long working in Heilbron. I don't
see him any more.

And was it Busisiwe Moloi who told you that the name of the policeman who
shot these two boys, your sons, was Hlongwane? --- Yes, she is the one
who told us, as well as Feddington saw him.

(Inaudible) ... Busisiwe Moloi the same person as Mzimbi Moloi, or are
they two different people? --- No, they are different. It's two separate
persons.

	/And the

And the death certificate, what does that read as

the cause of death? There's no death certificate, is there? --- No, the
Magistrate told me by word of mouth. I didn't get any death certificate.

Thank you very much.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: It's not easy to find words after listening to the story. It's
tragic when a young man is killed, and possibly even more tragic when
it's a 14-year-old boy who probably was just shot in the crossfire in a
time of conflict. We heard that you would like some tombstones to be put
to commemorate the deaths of your sons, and perhaps even a creche in
memory of perhaps your son, and other young people who were killed. We
will certainly take that message to the right people and see what we can
do. Nothing can bring your sons back, but we are grateful that we are now
living in a time where it is less likely that this will happen again, and
one of the reasons why we have this Truth and Reconciliation Commission
is to remind all of us of the heavy, heavy cost and the heavy price that
we have had to pay, and to remind us that we must work together so that
it never happens again.

I hope that just by virtue that you are sitting together, that you are
mothers united in a common loss, that this will be of some strength to
you, and that so many other mothers and so many other families together
will help to build a new South Africa, so that young boys and young men
will never die in vain again.

Thank you very much indeed for coming.

	---------------------

MR BORAIN: Good afternoon, Mr Marais. You can hear me all right?

MR MARAIS: Yes, I can hear you.

MR BORAIN: Tell me, who is the lady who is sitting with you?

MR MARAIS: This is my mother.

MR BORAIN: We are very, very glad to welcome you also, very glad to see
you. Now, you've have a very long wait, and it's long in the afternoon,
and you are the last witness, but your story is as important as everybody
else's, and you're going to tell us about what happened to you. Not about
someone else, but about what happened to you, particularly at the time
when you were detained and also tortured. But before you do so I'd be
grateful if you, Mr Marais, would please stand for the oath.

	---------------------

EZEKIEL MATSIDISO MARAIS (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Thank you very much. Will you be seated please. My colleague,
Mrs Gcabashe, is going to lead you and assist you in the telling of your
own story, and I am going to hand over to her now. Thank you.

MRS GCABASHE: I greet you, Matsidiso. Mr Chairperson has already said
that you've been waiting since this morning to appear before the
Commission. I want to thank you for the patience. I want to thank you for
waiting to come and appear here so that we can all know the truth of what
happened to you. Is your mother going to help you as you relate your
story? --- Yes, I am going to say a few words, and she will also add
something.

Is it fine if I call you Matsidiso? Tell us briefly where do you stay,
where do you come from, who is your

	/family?

family? --- I stay in Bathu location, a section called Four and Six, but
I use the Rockland address where I am staying. I live in a shack close to
Mangawung School, but I actually come from Rockland.

You said ... (incomplete) --- My home is in Rockland,

There is something - you've just said now you live in Mangawung. Can you
please elaborate? --- I erected a shack close to the school in a ground.
Yes, I have two places where I stay, but it's two years now that I have
been staying at Four and Six.

You are here to tell us about the torture at the Fountain Security
Branch. --- Yes, that's right.

I have a question that I would like to ask you. You said you joined the
ANC in 1976. --- It was around 1977 when I joined.

What happened then in 1980? --- In 1980 I was arrested. It was '79 when I
remember well. The schools were closing on that day. I wanted to say we
were closing the shops down because we wanted to mourn for the June 16
day. The police arrested us. We've already closed down all the shops
around Mangawung. I think it was the last shop that we were supposed to
go to, and the owner of that shop called the police. Very close to the
hostel the police came and they arrested us. They asked us what have we
done to the shop owners, why do we tell people to close down their shops?
I intimidated that gentleman. I said, "What have we said to you?" He
said, "You told me to close down our shops." They took us to Fountain
Security Branch, and on our way a black policemen slapped one of the
people who were arrested, and he used his elbow to

	/press him

press him against the seat. He left him and then he looked at me. He also
slapped me. I just looked at him. We were now getting into the town. He
was now talking nicely to us, and he asked us what do we want to be in
the future. And then I can't remember what answer did we give him. When
we arrived at Fountain Security Branch we parked on the other side, and
the other side was Fountain Security Branch. This hefty man was holding
me and I was just on my tiptoes. When we got into the building Hendrik
Prinsloo came in, and he said to me he thinks he knows me. And he quickly
grabbed one of the Comrades, or one of the people who was in our company,
he started assaulting him. He hit him against the wall. He even used his
fists.

Matsidiso, I want to take you back. You said the Amabutho attacked you.
Can you please tell us who do you refer to when you say Amabutho? --- The
first time when the Amabutho attacked me it was in 1986. I was from the
ANC training.

Who are these Amabutho? --- These were the police under the leadership of
Mayor Matobisa.

Thank you. You say you've been in gaol for six months. --- No, I was
arrested because - can you please repeat that question. No, the ANC
Comrades arrested me. He was an MK member.

You said to us you were injured. Did you go to the doctor? Did you go to
the doctor because you were injured? --- Are you referring to the attacks
by the Amabutho? Yes, I went to Philonomi Hospital. I only woke up at
Philonomi Hospital. I don't know who took me to the hospital. These
people who assaulted me, they did all

this at ... (inaudible) ... they had a police dog with

	/them.

them.

Can I please take you back once more. Do you know the name of the doctor
who examined you? --- No, I don't know the doctor's name, but I think the
files are still there.

Now, the name of the hospital you went to? --- I went to Philonomi
Hospital.

Do you have any record that will tell us that you've been admitted to the
s hospital? If we want to know further about your stay in hospital shall
we get any document? --- No, I don't have any document with me, but there
is information. Even at the hospital I saw the policemen who tortured me,
together with Gerrard who used to search my home. I wanted to run away,
but another girl took me back to the bed.

Matsidiso, we want to thank you. We have listened to the way in which you
were tortured and we feel very sorry. You said to us you even went to the
hospital to see the doctor. We will try to find out from the doctor what
kind of help can we give you. Are you still under medication? --- No, not
at this stage.

Are you employed? --- No, I was expelled in 1980.

Thank you very much, Matsidiso. I will now take everything back to the
Chairman. --- I think I didn't mention most of the things that I wanted
to say. I was told that some of the things I will come and say before the
Commission. The torture that they did to me I didn't talk about. I think
the people who tortured me were from the Inkatha, because they were
speaking a different language.

	/Thank you

Thank you very much. We will try to find out from the hospital what
happened.

	---------------------

MR LYSTER: Mr Marais, you said that there were three separate occasions
where you were tortured or assaulted. One was in 1979. That was when you
were taken to the Fountain Security Branch headquarters. Again in 1980
you were taken to the Fountain Security Branch headquarters, and again in
1991 when you were attacked or assaulted at your home by the Amabutho. Is
that correct? --- When the Amabutho assaulted me it was in 1990.

But is it correct that you were taken in 1979 to Fountain Security Branch
and you were tortured there, and again in 1980? --- Yes, that's true.

Do you want to just tell us briefly the manner in which they tortured you
in 1979? --- How did they torture you? You said that you were taken there
with a colleague or a friend of yours, and the policeman slapped you in
the car, and then at the Fountain Security Branch it was a policeman by
the name of Prinsloo, was it, who started assaulting your friend. Can you
tell us what they did to you? --- The first day when they picked me up
they tortured me. They had a warrant of arrest at first, and the other
one who was interrogating me slapped me. He was busy interrogating me and
I didn't pay attention, I was looking outside. When I was still looking
outside he slapped me again, and he took out his gun, he pointed it at
me. And then I paid full attention. There was one policeman who was
passing by, and then he was called in and he was shown this letter. And
then I asked this friend of mine from Gauteng what this letter

	/was all

was all about, because we've been fighting the whites in those years
about the system of education that was in place. And it was difficult for
me to find out the real reason for me being in the cell. Apparently there
is something that I have written in the letter that led to my arrest. Now
Gerrard was hitting me on my chest. And the letter further stated that
the whites have been oppressing us for quite a long time, and at a later
stage they were joined by our brothers now, who were now engaging
themselves in the evil deeds of the police. I think those words were very
uncomfortable for him. And then he handcuffed me and they also tied my
feet, and he made me lie on the sofa, and he used the electric shocks on
my ears and he electrocuted me. I think during that time Mrs Mandela was
in Brandfort. I couldn't stand for two minutes. I shook, and ultimately I
fell. I shifted from the drawers that were close to me until to the next
wall. He took out his stick and he continually hit me with this. He was
still interrogating me, and I was giving him answers. "There is nothing I
know, there is nothing I know." I must say that Sivonelo School had been
burnt down, and I didn't know what the school had been burned because I
was in Gauteng, and when I came back I was told that the police are
looking for me because I took part in the burning of the school. When we
arrived here I personally went to Fountain, and this black policeman was
attending me. Now, when I was tortured this white policeman got out of
the room, and when he got out I felt that my hands were sore. They were
as if they were chopped. He came back in. He was angry with me. He used
this stick furthermore to hit me, and I told him, "Sir, I

	/have an

have an operation, I have an appendix operation." When I said that to him
I was really giving him the freedom to do whatever he wanted to do. He
left me. They put me into the Volkswagen and then I was transferred to
Brandfort. I stayed in Brandfort for a week and then he came back. He
took me out of the cell and he gave me a cool drink. The cell was
situated very close to the charge office. He wanted me to confirm what he
heard from other people. I said to him, "I don't want to endorse anything
that those people have said. I think we will talk in the court of law."
And he said to me, "I know you are scared of talking. I will tell you
what to write on the paper." I agreed with what he was saying, and he
gave me a pen and I started writing. He took me, together with an
interpreter, into the Magistrate's office and I stated my case, and then
I told them that there is nothing that I know. I know nothing of what
happened. And I told the Magistrate that this person had been torturing
me, and he forced me to write this statement. That is why I wrote this.
And then we went out with two different statements now. It was a corridor
with a door on the side, and he pulled me into this room. He said, "What
did you say to the Magistrate?" and I heard him slapping me. It's since
then I cannot use my ear. For three years I have been hearing funny
sounds with my ear, but after some time it was quite well. There was
another policeman who came to me. His name was Hendrik and he was
together with the interpreter, and we went into the office and we put on
our clothes. When I realised we were in the veld. The tar road was far,
and then we were tipped into the veld. They interrogated me. I was
fastened to the car. They said to

	/me, "You

me, "You don't want to speak the truth. Now go," and they released me.
They said, "Go to Botswana." They wanted me to go deep into the veld, but
I refused, I said to them, "No, I am not going to do this," because I
knew what happened in different places like in Gauteng, and we have been
reading in newspapers that a person was on his way to the shop with his
girlfriend and then he was shot dead, and then they took the girl with
them. So I thought they were going to do the same with me, and I refused,
I didn't go into the veld. They said to me, "You are going to die and rot
in that veld. It was during those times when Dr Matata Mohlana and them
were in the leadership.

(Inaudible) ... can you take us now to 1980. You said that ...
(incomplete - end of Side A, Tape 4) ... it said that there was rent
boycott in your area, and that you were arrested for that and taken to
Fountain, and you were tortured and you got injuries to your neck. Is
that correct? --- In 1980 we were busy closing the shops down when we got
arrested, and I was taken to Fountain Security Branch. There were four of
us. When we arrived in Fountain the other police said he knows me. It was
Hendrik. And the others went back. He looked at me and he said, "It's you
again." It was the second time now that I had been arrested. And he was
pulling me with my pairs of trousers in his office. He was slippering
(sic) me on the floor. When we got into his office he trampled on me as
much as he could. I was rolling on the floor. He continually trampled on
me, and he said, "I am going to kill you." And he said to me, "You are a
kaffir," and I said to them, "What do you want?" He asked me what is it
that we wanted, and I told him about the education that

	/was in

was in poor conditions, and I told him that we didn't find anything wrong
with closing down the shops. And he continually told me that I was a bad
kaffir. He had already trampled me enough on my neck. He was hefty, he
was well built, and I was a young and upcoming youngster, and my neck had
been giving me trouble since that day until now.

(Inaudible) ... you were assaulted at your house by the Amabutho in 1991.
Is that correct? --- 1991?

1991 you said ... (inaudible) --- Yes, I think it was in 1990. I didn't
mention the ANC trial. It was in 1985. But I think I indicated that in my
statement.

(Inaudible) ... you mentioned that in your statement. If you can just
finally tell us about how you were assaulted by the Amabutho, and then
we'll ask your mother if she has anything that she wishes to say or to
confirm. In 1990 or 1991 you were beaten, you said, by the Amabutho, is
that correct? --- No, I didn't mention anything about the ANC. I was
poisoned, I even went to the doctor, and my ankles were swollen. They
were supposed to interrogate me, but when we were on our way they
discovered that I couldn't walk, and they asked me, "Why are you walking
so slowly?" I told them that my legs were swollen. I didn't want to tell
him what happened because I knew that I was going to revenge at one
stage, and they took me to a doctor called Dr Oosthuizen. I tried to tell
this doctor everything, but he didn't want to listen to me. The policemen
also encouraged me to tell the doctor what happened. They were begging me
to eat, and the Fountain Police wanted to know why was I not eating, and
I would only keep quiet and ignore them. I

	/didn't

didn't realise that they were poisoning me. At night when I am asleep I
would feel my head going round. I would as if there is a person trampling
on me. At times I would even feel like, you know, a train is just driving
on my body. And I was told that the food that I ate affected me. They
took me to the doctor then, and the doctor gave me an ointment and some
few tablets. They did not give me tablets. I went to Burke Road Police
Station, and that's where they gave me the tablets. I didn't trust this
policeman any more when he called me. You know, I was suspicious, and I
thought he was going to tell me something funny and I didn't give heed to
what he was saying. I took the tablets and I swallowed them. I pretended
as if I swallowed them, but I put them under my tongue. And then I showed
them to one of my friends. I said, "Look, here are their tablets. I am
not going to drink them," and truly that was the end of it.

(Inaudible) ... about all those things, and we have got all that
information in your statement, which you've now confirmed. Thank you very
much for sharing all these terrible things with us. This is something
that's been happening to you since 1979, it's over 15 years, and we
understand the pain and suffering that you have experienced. Is there
anything that your mother would like to - just to confirm now? She is on
the stage with you. Is there - she hasn't made a statement, and we don't
normally allow people to give evidence unless they have made a statement,
but if there is something important and brief that she would like to say
... do you want to say that? She will have to be sworn in first.

MR BORAIN: Could I ask you, Mrs Marais, do you want to

	/add anything

add anything at all? Do you wish to add anything?

MRS MARAIS: I just wanted to indicate that the condition you see him in
... (intervention)

MR BORAIN: ... interrupt you, but I cannot hear you unless you have taken
an oath, so would you please stand to take the oath.

	---------------------

MRS MARAIS (Sworn, States)

MR BORAIN: Mrs Marais, we have heard at some length from you son, and if
there is something new that you have to say please tell us now. --- I
just want to say that I was very hurt, because when my son was released
from the cells he wasn't himself any more. I was so hurt. Why did they
take his penis and electrocuted him? He was a man and they had to do
that. Why did they do that with him? As you see him now he is not the
child I gave birth to. I cannot understand him any more. He doesn't
understand whether he is living or he is dead. And the police did this to
him because they continually picked him up at home, and they would
torture him, they would assault him. They have really destroyed the life
of my child. He can hardly do anything. He stays with the chickens and
the doves and pigeons in the house. My house is so dirty. He doesn't want
to live with people. He prefers to live with these birds that I have
mentioned. That is why he doesn't stay with us. I thank you. There is
nothing more that I would say to you.

Thank you for that. I just have to ask you one question. Your son, is he
receiving any medical treatment at all at the moment, either at a clinic
or at a hospital or from a doctor? --- No, he refused to go to the

	/doctors

doctors because he doesn't want any white person. He goes to the
hospital. The day he feels he has to go to the hospital he just goes.

I can understand that having suffered as much as he has, and having these
dreadful experiences, that he would be very suspicious of anybody, of any
person, and perhaps that's why he finds it difficult, and we may be able
to see what we can do, to talk to the local medical people to find out if
we can offer some help.

Now, I want to thank Ezekiel, and thank you as his mother, for coming. So
much of what has happened has destroyed so much in our country, and it's
particularly tragic when we see young people who have been so badly
damaged. We will do everything we can. We have listened very carefully to
those experiences, and in particular we will discuss the situation with
the medical people here in Bloemfontein and see what help we can do.
Thank you again very much indeed for coming. God be with you. --- Thank
you very much, Sir.

	---------------------

