


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 12.02.97			NAME: PHILLIP BEJILE BOB

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________

PHILLIP BEJILE BOB: (sworn states)

MR SANDI: Your name is Philip Bejile Bob?

MR BOB: Yes.

MR SANDI: You are going to tell us about Sophie Nunusie Maarman?

MR BOB: That's correct.

MR SANDI: How are you related to her?

MR BOB: She is my daughter.

MR SANDI: You say in 1986 she was shot. Can you tell us briefly about her
and what happened?

MR BOB: It was on a Sunday in the morning. I was talking to Nunusi
telling her that she must wash my T-shirt because I was going to wear it
as I was going to work. She told me that there was no soap so I gave her
R5 and I told her to go and buy some. She went to do this and after she
had gone a few minutes I saw the people toytoying down the road, they
went up Queen Street and after a while I heard a big sound. After that my
neighbour Trompie who resides at Mhlala came to me and said that my
daughter has been shot by Fiksie. I told Nothembile to go there and I
would follow after. I put on my shoes and followed her.

	When I was at the corner there was a taxi.

MR SANDI: Who is this Fixie that you are talking about, is he the one
that the other witness referred to?

MR BOB: He is the one that the other witness talked about, was not
around. I'm talking about Foure, Fiksie Foure. We took a taxi down to the
hospital and when we were next to the councillor's house Fiksie stopped
us and said, "I just want to look at this dog that I have shot". The
driver stopped, we kept quiet and my wife was still crying. Then we
continued and went to the hospital. When we arrived there my daughter was
certified dead.

MR SANDI: Do you mean that this child was shot while passing the
toytoying people?

MR BOB: I'm not sure because she took another direction, the shop was
just across the railway line and the toytoying people were on the other
side.

MR SANDI: Who is Trompie Tini, the one who said he was there, he saw
everything?

MR BOB: He is the one who came to tell us that our daughter was shot by
Fiksie.

MR SANDI: Where is Tini now?

MR BOB: He is in Graaf Reinet, he stays there.

MR SANDI: Was Fiksie arrested after shooting this child?

MR BOB: After two months we were called to the court of law, we went
there at nine o'clock in the morning and were still sitting there until 4
o'clock in the afternoon but we were not called. We used to see Fiksie
and the others walking up and down wearing their black gowns.

MR SANDI: Do you mean at Graaf Reinet?

MR BOB: Yes at the court in Graaf Reinet, we were waiting outside.

MR SANDI: Who told you that you should go to the court?

MR BOB: Some policemen came to tell us the day before that at 9 o'clock
we should go to the court.

MR SANDI: Did you ever consult with any legal representative?

MR BOB: We didn't go to the legal representative of Graaf Reinet, we
consulted a woman attorney from Port Elizabeth but after that she passed
away.

MR SANDI: Do you still remember her name?

MR BOB: I couldn't find the document so I cannot remember her name.

MR SANDI: But do you think we can still get those documents?

MR BOB: I'm not sure because it's been quite a long time.

MR SANDI: Is that all that you'd like to tell us Mr Bob?

MR BOB: Yes that's all.

MR SANDI: Do you have a wish that you'd like to tell the Commission about.

MR BOB: Yes I have because I'm telling the truth and I am sure of this.

MR SANDI: Do you have a request or a wish that you'd like to ask the
Commission.

MR BOB: Yes I would request that because I'm still maintaining her child,
she is 16 years old.

MR BOB: Is she at school?

MR SANDI: Yes when her mother passed away I took her to school. She is in
standard four now.

MR SANDI: Is that all or maybe I can just take you back to the
chairperson? Is there anything else that you would like to tell us?

MR BOB: There is nothing else, there would never be anything that I would
want to say, what else can I say?

Sir I want to say, the death of my child is fine, what I'm saying right
now, it's fine, her death is something that was done deliberately. I
don't even know why that white man shot my child among the people.

MR SANDI: The request concerning this incident of the death of your child
is to ask the Commission to help you in the loss of your child.

MR BOB: Yes even now I made a plan. My wife was still alive at the time.
When my wife was looking for help for this child it became clear that
there was no birth certificate from the person that my wife had once
visited, but I tried to see another white woman but she said that I must
try an bring the birth certificate, but I couldn't get it. Instead I made
a photostat of a birth certificate and now I'm waiting for that
certificate so that I can go back to that white woman.

MR SANDI: Thank you Mr Bob, I'll hand you over to the chairperson. If
there's something else that you have left out you can just tell us while
they are asking questions.

MEMBER OF PANEL: Mr Phillip Bob, I have one question. Your daughter is
Sophie Nonusi Maarman?

MR BOB: Yes.

MEMBER OF PANEL: And you are Philip Bejile Bob?

MR BOB: Yes that's correct.

MEMBER OF PANEL: Why do you have different surnames?

MR BOB: I was not married to her mother at the time. We got married after
her death.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you for your story, it is a very painful story, but
the way that you are relating the story, even though it is painful, you
make us to laugh so that we are forgetting that this is painful. In this
hearing we usually listen to painful things, every day we listen to
painful stories. We are glad that we get people sometimes like you even
if they are relating some painful stories we just laugh a little bit.
There's no need to cry Sir, thank you you can take your seat, we are
going to take note of your request. If there's something else that we
need from you like details, the investigators of the Truth Commission
will come to your place and gather some other information that would be
necessary. For now we say thank you. Thank you Sir.	

	-----------------------------





