	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


		````	````			TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	NOMIGHT REGINA BOOYSE		

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 1



REVD FINCA:	Mrs Nomight Booyse, we welcome you here today at the
Commission. We realise that you are in great pain. Would you please
endure as we would be asking you a few questions. Reverend Xundu will
swear you in and then Mr Ntsiki Sandi will ask you a few questions on
behalf of the Commission.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

NOMIGHT REGINA BOOYSE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Ma'am.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mrs Booyse, let me greet you this
afternoon. How are you doing? Are you all right?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, in God's mercy we will.

MR SANDI:	Let's start. As I understand according to your statement, you
are going to talk about your grandson, Vuyani who was shot at Jansenville
in 1986?

	Let me just make sure about your name Mrs Booyse. Is your full name
Nomight Regina Nonqele Booyse? Is that so?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, sir.

MR SANDI:	I'll hand over to you Mrs Booyse so that you can tell us what
happened to Vuyani.

MRS BOOYSE:	My grandson as he was leaving home, he requested if he could
go to my cousin's place, Mlondi. It is not too far from my own house.
Mlondi's house faces my back yard. I can see Mlondi's house from my own
house.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	NR BOOYSE

	I allowed him to go, I then continued with my own work at home. As I was
in the kitchen with house chores, I heard steps running towards my house
calling out saying that Vuyani has been shot.

	I had heard the sound, but I did not take it to heart. I got out of the
house, he was not shot too far from the house. As I walked out of my
gate, I saw him laying on the ground on his stomach, face down.

	Three men then came out, telling me that he was shot by Vuyani Jonasi.

MR SANDI;	Is it the same Vuyani Jonasi that was referred to in the
previous testimony?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, it is.

MR SANDI:	Your grandson, Vuyani, how old was he when he got shot?

MRS BOOYSE:	I think he was 18 or 19 years of age, I am not sure.

MR SANDI:	Therefor he was quite young?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, he was young.

MR SANDI:	You say that this happened in the evening?

MRS BOOYSE:	It was the time when I would close my gate, it was not too
late at night, it was early evening.

MR SANDI:	You say that your cousin's house that Vuyani had gone to, he
used to go to regularly?

MRS BOOYSE:	Vuyani was friends with my cousin's children.

MR SANDI:	What I am saying is as you were related, staying close to each
other, the children would regularly visit each other?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, although they were girls, they would come to my house.
That is why Vuyani would also go to their house to.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	NR BOOYSE

MR SANDI:	Was Vuyani taken to hospital after he had been shot? What
happened?

MRS BOOYSE:	When I went towards Vuyani I was very emotional and in deep
pain. I don't know who took him from where he had been shot, I was not
conscious at the time of what was happening around me.

MR SANDI:	As you hear from the community, why did Vuyani Jonasi shoot
your grandson?

MRS BOOYSE:	I never did hear of a reason why he shot my grandson. But
this one time I was with my grandson going to town and they were driving
in their car passed us, and then Vuyani Jonasi said to my grandson that
one day he would get him.

	I did not like that. I went to the office and I reported this.

MR SANDI:	Who was Vuyani Jonasi with?

MRS BOOYSE:	He was with other policemen.

MR SANDI:	And then as he was driving passed, he swore that he would get
him one day?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, it is so.

MR SANDI;	Did you ask your grandson why Vuyani was swearing against him?

MRS BOOYSE:	He said he had no idea, he would also like to find out what
Vuyani Jonasi had against him.

MR SANDI:	According to your statement you say that you took a step as
your grandson was shot?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, I went to the police to lay charges against Vuyani
Jonasi. The police that was in charge said that there is a bullet that
shot at a stone, they would wait for the stone to be brought to the
charge office for them to continue with the case.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	NR BOOYSE

MR SANDI:	What was the policeman's name?

MRS BOOYSE:	I don't know.

MR SANDI;	Was he a Station Commander?

MRS BOOYSE:	I am not sure, but he was in charge. He is the one who said
he would wait for the stone.

MR SANDI:	Did he take a statement as you were talking?

MRS BOOYSE:	No, he did not.

MR SANDI:	Did he look into records?

MRS BOOYSE:	No, he did not. He just said that we must wait for the stone.

MR SANDI;	Did he say you must come back?

MRS BOOYSE:	I would go back regularly and they kept on saying that the
stone had not arrived.

MR SANDI:	Did you go to Gerber time and time again and he would not open
any docket or write any statement?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, it is so.

MR SANDI:	The last time when you were speaking to Mr Gerber, what was the
conclusion? What did he say about this matter?

MRS BOOYSE:	There was no conclusive evidence as such he said that he had.

MR SANDI:	You say that the police did not look after you well, they did
not follow your cases as they should have?

MRS BOOYSE:	The police did not look after us as they should have. They
did not care.

MR SANDI:	Did you hear the lady that was talking here in the morning from
Venterstad, she said that the police from Venterstad were the law
themselves. Was it the case at Jansenville?

MRS BOOYSE:	The police had no decorum. I myself had been kicked out by
the police from Jansenville.

MR SANDI:	They did whatever they wanted to, they feared

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	NR BOOYSE

nothing? They did not fear the law for they were the law themselves?

MRS BOOYSE:	Sir, what I would like to say is that I thank the Lord for
having gathered us here today with people like you to find out our
problems. I thought that my son's case has disappeared in thin air, but
today I am able to testify.

MR SANDI:	In conclusion Ma'am, the day of the funeral - you say that
there were problems.

MRS BOOYSE:	The funeral itself was filled with police. They were all
around the house. The Reverend Mahlinza was handling the funeral.

	When we were coming from the graveyard, there were police vans
everywhere. We could not do things the normal way. They were in caspers
actually on the bridge, with huge guns in their hands.

MR SANDI:	The day before the funeral, did the police come to your house?

MRS BOOYSE:	I can't remember whether they did come to the house or not,
that week.

MR SANDI:	On the day of the funeral, did the police respect the members
of the family?

MRS BOOYSE:	They had no respect for anyone. The stopped people from
coming to the funeral.

MR SANDI;	How did you feel at home considering that the police continued
to ill-treat you even after your grandson had passed away?

MRS BOOYSE:	Our hearts were bleeding.

MR SANDI:	Let us conclude Ma'am. This police who did unheard of things,
cruel things, if they were present here today, what would you say to them?

MRS BOOYSE:	My grandson was shot, what I don't understand

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	NR BOOYSE

is that there was no chaos as such in the township, it was quiet, it was
peaceful, but they shot him. I want to know why.

MR SANDI:	Thank you very much Mrs Booyse. Do you have any requests before
I hand over to the Chairperson?

MRS BOOYSE:	I have no husband sir, and I was bringing up this child on my
own. He would have temporary jobs and he would give me the money for
support.

	This child would have been my source of help today. If the Government
can do anything to help me, then please, I request that I be helped.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mrs Booyse. Mr Chairperson, I hand over the witness
to you.

REVD FINCA:	Mrs Booyse, I just have one question. Perhaps you had already
answered this question and I missed it. Was there a court case, did you
report this to the Magistrate to lay charges on the perpetrators?

MRS BOOYSE:	Yes, I did report the case and the policeman said he is
waiting for the stone. I could not continue. I tried to get his Death
Certificate, then I was told to pay R6-00 and they gave me the Death
Certificate.

	They sent the Death Certificate to me. I would go to them, sorry, they
were actually supposed to send the Death Certificate to me, they promised
to send it, but they never did. I continued to go. Vuyani was buried
there, Vuyani was killed there, they should have given me the Death
Certificate.

	I then went to the police station requesting the Death Certificate. They
said I must go to Uitenhage. I said no, the Uitenhage office said I must
get it from you. They referred to certain records of theirs. There were
two

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7	NR BOOYSE

letters, one from the Magistrate, they gave me these two papers and they
said I must put them in an envelope and post them. I then went to the
Magistrate's office and asked them to photocopy for me these two pages.

	They then said I must put this envelope in the mail. I took the copies
of these pages, I gave it to a teacher, Sithole, telling her what
happened. I gave these two pages and a letter that they wrote me, that
they cannot find the Death Certificate, I gave these three documents to
the teacher.

	Up to this day I did not get the Death Certificate.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mrs Booyse. As you came up the stairs, you were
very emotional. Thank you for gathering strength and give us the details
that you could about your grandson, Vuyani.

	Thank you as well that as an elderly lady you went from office to office
endeavouring to solve this problem, and you did not get much respect or
help. You have showed us how the police did not care about the death of
your grandson.

	Sidney Mofomade, if he is listening on radio perhaps, we hope that he
listened to your story. We hope that he realises how much work is to be
done to discipline and educate the police. If they are going to continue
being policemen, there is a lot that needs to be done. They need to be
trained again so that they do their job properly so that they are able to
handle people properly.

	Thank you Ma'am. We are going to wait for the documents that you have
said you have sent to us. Perhaps the teacher that you gave the documents
to, can send those documents to us. Thank you Ma'am.

	--------------------

