	1	M L BOPAPE


	1	M L BOPAPE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	02.12.1996	NAME:	M L BOPAPE

CASE:	JB02185		-	MOUTSE

DAY 1

_________________________________________________________

MR MALAN: Mrs Bopape, will you please stand for the oath.

MOSENYA LINAH BOPAPE: (Duly sworn in, states).

MR MALAN: Thank you. You may be seated.

MS SEROKE: Good afternoon Mrs Bopape. Are you able to hear me clearly?

MRS BOPAPE: Yes, I do.

MS SEROKE: We welcome you. We will ask you to tell us about the incident
which happened to your son on the first of January 1986.

MRS BOPAPE: May I start? I want to thank this opportunity for being given
to talk about my son. After the death of his father, after two weeks we
had a message that Adma has died. They told us the reason that they were
killed in Siyabuswa. What could we do because the Siyabuswa people were
fighting and we only heard that they were killed. After some time when
they were supposed to be buried the corpse was brought by State people
and they told us that nobody is allowed to see the corpse. We did not
grieve for him. I had quite a problem at that time because nobody cannot
afford to not to grieve. I do not know if it was the Law at that time
that people should not be given an opportunity to grieve. Then we buried
him on Monday.

	The following day a white man came. He said he should be exhumed because
he needs to be examined. We asked them

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	2	M L BOPAPE

when are they bringing him back. They said on Wednesday. What can we say
because the Government was saying that. Then he was, we went to the
cemetery and we told them that at the cemetery there is a person in
charge. He told Induna. They went to the cemetery to exhume the body. It
was just to keep quiet at that time because I did not know what to do.
They exhumed my son and they took him. We waited on Wednesday. Around
twelve o' clock they brought the corpse. Then they went to rebury him
again. They did not tell us the results of the examination. All those
were known by the State agents. We were just complaining on our own.

	After that, that is all I can say, the Bopape family said God will take
care of all those things, but the police came again and they just said
the police have killed your children senselessly and those people were
arrested. After they were convicted then you will be called to be told of
the results. Thereafter we were not called. We do not know as to whether
the case has been set. We do not know as to whether it was the practice
of the day that the court proceedings would just go on without us being
informed. That is all I can say, but we are hopeless and we just say God
will see what to do. I thank you.

MS SEROKE: You say your son was killed because people from

Siyabuswa were fighting? What were they fighting for? What was the
problem?

MRS BOPAPE: I heard that they were just fighting the Ndebele people and
our people were fighting and it seems our children were going to mediate
and they were found and killed. We do not know the reason why they were
killed. Only the Government knows.

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	3	M L BOPAPE

MS SEROKE: Was he a policeman in KwaNdebele Police services or South
African Police services?

MRS BOPAPE: He was transferred to KwaNdebele.

MS SEROKE: Was he a member of the South African Police services in South
Africa or in KwaNdebele at that time?

MRS BOPAPE: I do not know.

MS SEROKE: Okay.

MRS BOPAPE: I am not sure as to whether he was a member of the South
African Police in KwanDeble. I am not sure.

MS SEROKE: When they arrived that they wanted to exhume him, what was the
reason?

MRS BOPAPE: They said he was going to be examined because he was not
examined well.

MS SEROKE: Did they give you some documents which shows the examination?

MRS BOPAPE: They did not show us anything. They did not show us anything.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you. Russell Ally.

DR ALLY: Thank you Your Grace. Your Grace, this is one of the cases that
we have had an opportunity to actually look into a bit. We did obtain the
police docket. This was an incident during that conflict that we have
been hearing about. There were actually two policemen that day. The other
policemen was David Moradie and it was a routine investigation, but
because of all of this talk about Imbokhoto, raiding and that Imbokhoto
was going to be coming into the villages, when these policemen arrived
they were suspected of being Imbokhoto. There was a confrontation, shots
were actually fired. One person was killed and it was after that that the
crowd then attacked the two policemen. They were hacked to death, they
were burnt. There was then

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	4	M L BOPAPE

an investigation, a court investigation. Eight people were charged.
Eventually three people were found guilty, not of murder, but of assault
and with intent to do grievous bodily harm. That was the charge that they
were found guilty of. They were sentenced a two year suspended sentence
and they were told to pay R50.00 for two years to the families of the
victims, to the two families. So they each had to pay, the three of them
had to pay R25.00 each and that was to be paid to the families. Now the
issue that we are still trying to find out about is that there is some
dispute about the monies that some of the, the claim that not all the
monies was actually paid and the last time our investigators were
actually looking into that to establish what had actually happened, but
that is as far as we were able to establish with that case Your Grace.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Any questions.

MR MALAN: yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Wynand Malan.

MR MALAN: Mrs Bopape, what is the situation with the monies that had to
be paid? Have you received monies from these convicted people?

MRS BOPAPE: Yes, I did get that money. I do not know as to whether that
was all. The police were bringing that money. Ultimately, I took his ID
number to Sisigo. When I returned to the police they told us that our
monies are ready. Then I came with my son to the Commissioner. They gave
us that money. I do not know as to whether that was all which we needed
to receive. They gave us R1 800.00. Thereafter somebody came and tell us
that your sons monies are ready. Then how can we come. They told us that
we should tell you that that is so. We came to the police station. When we

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	5	M L BOPAPE

arrived we went again to the Commissioner. They told us to leave. They
said that money is not here until now. Thereafter I took the ID there.
Then they said when is this thing going to end. They said you are no more
going to get money until now. I do not know as to whether that money I
was given all the money which I was deserved for.

MR MALAN: Was the total amount of money that you received R1 800.00?

MRS BOPAPE: That was the last money I received.

MR MALAN: And that was the only money you received?

MRS BOPAPE: Do you mean, are you asking is that all?

MR MALAN: Yes. You never had any money before that?

MRS BOPAPE: (Not translated).

MR MALAN: Did you get it in one lumpsum?

MRS BOPAPE: Yes, they were bringing money in days. I do not know as to
whether I did receive all the money I deserved. I was only satisfied when
they said to me you are no more going to get any cent thereafter.

MR MALAN: Did you attend the court case?

MRS BOPAPE: No, I did not go to court. I only went to the police when I
delivered my ID as whether is this the last payment. They were saying
because your son was not married, you are no more going to get any money.
Therefore I took the ID to Sisigo.

MR MALAN: And do you know the people who were found guilty? The three
people, do you know them?

MRS BOPAPE: I do not know them.

MR MALAN: Thank you.

MRS BOPAPE: I thank you, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: I did not understand when you were saying all the money. How
much was the money you received?

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA

	6	M L BOPAPE

MRS BOPAPE: I do not know because it was brought by the police. The other
money I was taking them from post office. I do not know as to whether I
did get all the money. What I know, the last payment I got was R1 800.00.

CHAIRPERSON: Is it over R1 800.00 the money you got. You mean the money
you got, the first payment you got, did you get.

MRS BOPAPE: The other one is R2 000.00.

CHAIRPERSON: We will try to investigate to find out how much did you get.
We thank you that you are here now. People were killed in all sides
during that time, during that troubled times and you are the mother who
fell prey, whose son was killed. The pain you hear is the person who is
hurt by any parent. We bring comfort to you knowing that others who were
killed were policemen because at that time people thought that the police
were assisting those who were their enemies. We say God has given us this
gracious time of independence hoping that those acts will never happen
again in our country. We thank you, Mam.

MRS BOPAPE: I thank you, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: I just wanted to say thank you to the organisers for the two
seats that they have put a platform which enables you to see the
witnesses which did not happen earlier. I think they deserve a nice
little clap.

DR ALLY: Thank you Father. The next witness was also not here this
morning, but just to check if the witness is here.

	------------------------------









MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA

