
	1	K BUCWA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27/08/96	NAME: KWANELE MOSES BUCWA

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

MS MAYA: Thank you Chairperson. Our next witness is Kwanele Moses Bucwa.

KWANELE MOSES BUCWA: (sworn states)

MS MAYA: I greet you Kwanele, looking at our statement here before me, I
see that you were also injured on the 21 March, as a result of the
shooting, and we find that you were in the forefront of this procession
and you were riding a bicycle and when the shooting started, you were the
first to be shot. Now could you briefly explain how old were you at the
time and what did you actually see?

MR BUCWA: I was 17 years old in 1985 and I was riding in front of the
crowd of people who were chanting songs and there were two people at the
back of them. There was one policemen who lifted me up who's name was
Lieutenant Fouche who I got to know later on.

MS MAYA: You have mentioned some people and a certain Fouche who gave
some instructions that there should be shooting, what actually did you
see?

MR BUCWA: They were standing and showing up on top of the hippo and the
first shooting was the cause of my injury.

MS MAYA: So you were nearer and you saw him clearly?

MR BUCWA: Yes, he was the one sitting nearer to me.

MS MAYA: Where did this bullet hit you?

MR BUCWA: It hit me on the left hand side of my head.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	K BUCWA

MS MAYA: What was the extent of the injury?

MR BUCWA: I was injured such that one of my legs doesn't function
properly.

MS MAYA: After they had hit you, what else can you recall? Can you
briefly tell your story.

MR BUCWA: After I had been shot I fell down and I dislocated my arm and I
could hear the shooting going on. After they had shot, they came back to
me and kicked me trying to find out whether I was still alive and I
pretended to be dead and they went on to other people. I lay on my back
after they had kicked me. They were again checking on other people as to
whether they were still alive and they were still shooting other people
to death and they went on doing this and then there was a police van that
came and then later on ambulances came.

MS MAYA: You were also taken to hospital. How long were you there?

MR BUCWA: I was in provincial for four years, and I was transferred to
Livingstone Hospital and I was sent to the Church Street together with
others who were discharged, and there were other people in Church Street
who had been with us earlier and we were locked in.

MS MAYA: After the shooting you were arrested, is that so?

MR BUCWA: Yes, like that.

MS MAYA: How long were you arrested.

MR BUCWA: I was kept there for four days.

MS MAYA: And then after you were released, what happened to you?

MR BUCWA: After my release from jail, the policemen were after me and
then I went to Blinkpan where I was there for about a month and 3 weeks
and they were investigating on

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	K BUCWA

this case and they would come back and give a report to me and they would
tell that in their statement they said that I died.

MS MAYA: When did you come back from Blinkpan?

MR BUCWA: I went back after I had to appear in court and no one was found
guilty so I decided to go back home.

MS MAYA: Did you also get an opportunity to go and give evidence there in
court?

MR BUCWA: Yes I was the last one.

MS MAYA: Is there any evidence you can recall that was given about you by
the police?

MR BUCWA: Yes there is.

MS MAYA: What was it?

MR BUCWA: Some police say I died but, Lieutenant Fouche said I came five
minutes after the shooting and I left the bicycle and I ran away to some
nearby houses. That is the evidence that he gave.

MS MAYA: In other words, they were trying to say they were not
responsible for your shooting?

MR BUCWA: Yes they say I was not there at the time of the shooting,
instead I left my bicycle and ran away.

MS MAYA: Where is your bicycle now?

MR BUCWA: I never got my bicycle after that.

MS MAYA: Now you say you were 17 years old, what were you doing, were you
a student?

MR BUCWA: No, I was working.

MS MAYA: After you were injured, were you able to work again?

MR BUCWA: When I went back to my work, I was told that I had been
dismissed from work.

MS MAYA: And then, after you were unemployed did you get

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	K BUCWA

another opportunity to organise another job for yourself?

MR BUCWA: Yes, because I still work now at Sammat.

MS MAYA: The shooting on your head, how had it affected your health, are
there any changes you observed?

MR BUCWA: Yes, this affected me because they could not take this bullet
out because they said I would be paralysed and now this bullet is still
here in my head and my leg does not function properly.

MS MAYA: Now you mean this bullet is still within your body?

MR BUCWA: Yes, it's like that.

MS MAYA: I'm sure by your appearance here you have a wish or a request to
this Commission, what is it?

MR BUCWA: I wish I could get treatment. I wish a hall could be built
there in the location because most people had to go out of school, even
my brother was beaten up by the police because they want information
about my whereabouts.

MS MAYA: So if there could be a hall that could be erected in
commemoration of this incident, which on the other hand could be of help
to the people. Is that the only request you have Mr Bucwa?

MR BUCWA: No, that is not all.

MS MAYA: Go on, talk.

MR BUCWA: I would like to say even the compensation was only R17 000 and
it was insufficient and yet I have wishes to send my children to school
and some other times I can't work because of this leg, now I am not able
to provide for my children.

MS MAYA: How many children do you have?

MR BUCWA: I have got 2 children. One 3 year old, and one 6 year old.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	5	K BUCWA

MS MAYA: Is that all you have to say Mr Bucwa?

MR BUCWA: Yes

MS MAYA: I am now going to hand over to one of my colleagues.

PANEL MEMBER: Firstly I would like to thank Fundile, the first speaker
because I noticed that he had to be given a Grandpa and this has been
very strenuous for him to come and give this evidence, I can see you are
deeply hurt and it is painful to me and I cannot express my sympathy to
you and even some other times we get angered by these things that happen
to our people so thank you for coming here.

	Kwanele, I am very happy to see you, I've read a lot about you from the
journals about the little boy on a bicycle and the writers of those
articles some other times don't even have a picture of this place
Uitenhage and some others write about this incident when they come across
scholars from South Africa, even the victims here, there is some writing
about them. What is surprising mostly is that in all this excitement
about this Uitenhage case as it is referred to people tend to forget that
there are actual people behind this case who are seated here today and
therefore in all this excitement in the articles and the books written
you still sitting here to get to know about the truth about what actually
happened to you and it is our wish that we should also get the actual
truth.

	Therefore Kwanele, I would like to ask you at the time you were riding
this bicycle, and someone said you said you should come to one side is
there any policeman who said come this way?

MR BUCWA: Yes the policeman who had raised his hand indicated to me that
I should ride in between the peoples.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	6	K BUCWA

PANEL MEMBER: So as you were riding the bicycle, you were riding because
someone had indicated to you?

MR BUCWA: No, I did not. I was riding because I was with the crowd of the
peoples, so I did not actually go to the direction that this person has
asked me to follow. Then I saw the shooting and the dripping of blood.

PANEL MEMBER: I would also like to refer to the fact that at 17 you were
working and how far had you gone at school?

MR BUCWA: I had gone as far as Std.3 because my mother was a pensioner
and there was other children and therefore we could not manage to help my
mother.

PANEL MEMBER: That is the main reason why I'm asking because there are
many stories that we can relate about the suffering and the bad life that
people have led. So it means even earlier at an early tender stage you
were working.

MR BUCWA: I started to work in 1986 and I left school in Std.3 because I
could not proceed with my education. Thank you.

PANEL MEMBER: Just a few last questions, could you please come closer. We
are going to give ourselves time to go to the scene and to go and have a
look at it. Maybe when we get there you will again explain to us some
questions that are still not clear. You were in front of the crowd.

MR BUCWA: Yes, I was in front of the procession. They were following
after me.

PANEL MEMBER: So the instructions that was given to people to disperse
could have reached your ears first before the other people?

MR BUCWA: Yes.

PANEL MEMBER: Was there any other order?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	7	K BUCWA

MR BUCWA: There was none.

PANEL MEMBER: Secondly, who actually fired, who made the first shot?

MR BUCWA: It was Lieutenant Fouche, the one who had raised his hand. He
was the first to shoot, and then the other policemen started shooting and
I fell down and I could hear some gun shots and they got off the hippo
and they kicked me.

PANEL MEMBER: What was the distance between the procession and the
casper, could you perhaps estimate the distance?

MR BUCWA: I could say the hippos were where we are and people were there
next to those doors, and I was closer to the hippos.

PANEL MEMBER: In this Uitenhage story there is a mention of the name
Rastafarian, which comes from another version as the person who was the
leader. Did you perhaps see this Rastafarian as you were walking down the
street?

MR BUCWA: Yes, I saw him, he was in front of the crowd.

PANEL MEMBER: Was he shot and killed on the spot?

MR BUCWA: Yes Sir.

PANEL MEMBER: What was his contribution towards this march. Is it true
that he was the leader of the crowd?

MR BUCWA: Yes, he was the leader, he was asking the people to walk one
side so as to give way to the cars. He was maintaining order so that the
cars should drive past.

PANEL MEMBER: So you mean this was an orderly procession?

MR BUCWA: Yes, it was because this man had asked that people should walk
in a row and hold hands to show that they were in an orderly manner.

PANEL MEMBER: This report we get from Mr Fouche that these people
...(tape ends)... see some armed people.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	8	K BUCWA

MR BUCWA: No, they were not armed, in fact even the stones, I saw, I saw
them in court. So when I did not remember the bicycle, then they said
they were going to bring all this exhibition to court so that we should
talk about things we see. So I was shown the bicycle, I was shown a big
stone which was said I was carrying and several other stones that they
said that these people were holding and yet I had not seen anyone with a
stone. Now they say these people were going to stone the Whites. There
was also an old bottle of the steri milk which was there and it was full
of dust which showed that it was all empty.

PANEL MEMBER: We thank you, Mr Bucwa. We thank you that we now know you.
We read a lot about a boy on a bicycle not knowing that you are the
actual person. We are going

to adjourn for about 10 minutes and we shall resume at 11:15.

COMMISSION ADJOURNS





