


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		05.09.1996	NAME: MS LENA BUTHELEZI

CASE: 0180 - NELSPRUIT

DAY 4

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We ask Mrs Buthelezi to come forward. Please accord the
witness the dignity she deserves.

	Mrs Buthelezi, we welcome you. I think you have been waiting the whole
day. Now it is a little bit late and you are tired. You are the first
after lunch. We would like to ask you to relax so that you can put your
issue freely forward. I will request Commissioner Malan to help you in
taking your oath.

MR MALAN: Good afternoon, Mrs Buthelezi. Will you please stand to take
the oath.

LENA BUTHELEZI: (Duly sworn, states).

CHAIRPERSON: I will first ask you to speak a little bit louder to enable
everybody to hear you. You can now start with your issue and explain
everything to us, tell us what happened to your husband who was shot dead
by the police, as it is alleged, and tell us what happened.

MS BUTHELEZI: It was in 1990, the 29th of December, during the first New
Year's Eve. The children asked for permission to attend the festivities,
and the father agreed. The father took them to the festival. The father
said he is going to take the children to the venue and then he is going
to come back. I waited the whole night expecting my husband to return
home. I slept until the following morning.

	At about three o'clock, but I can't be sure of the

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	2	MS L BUTHELEZI

time. I received a telephone call from Themba Hospital. They were asking
whether this is the Buthelezi family. They asked me where the father is.
I told them that since the father took the children with him I don't know
where he now is. They asked me to come and visit the hospital. I
therefore went to the hospital. There was a visitor at home. I asked the
visitor to accompany me to the hospital.

	When we arrived at the hospital I found that it was Sister Mashina who
called me. She took me to the place where my husband was. I found that my
husband was already dead. Sister told me that the corpse was brought by
the soldiers. They told her that my husband was shot by the police.

	I was expecting the sister to tell me that maybe my husband was involved
in a car accident, but she said that the police shot him.

	We waited there. We went to the police station where a statement was
taken. I can't remember the month when the case started in the court.
When the case was interchanged during the court proceedings, the police
came. David Letswele, Joseph Mashele. The other one was a name called
Gondimani, I don't know the fourth one.

	The police from Mbekweni was never charged. I never even today
understand what the cause of my husband's death was. The case was
postponed until the last day in 1992. The first day when we attended the
court they said the Buthelezi family must go out of the court. We
expected to go, then we did as we were instructed. We waited outside the
court until late. We later asked when are we going to be invited to enter
the court. Then they said to us we did invite you, you didn't come in,
the case is dismissed. It was very,

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	3	MS L BUTHELEZI

very painful to us to hear that the case had been dismissed while we were
not there. We could not even get to the motive why my husband was killed.

	The police were involved, but they were never charged, because they are
police. They were police. Maybe therefore they had the right to do that.

	I was left alone with the children. They are scholars. I can't even
afford to pay the funds for them. Some are now sitting at home, they are
not continuing with their education, because I cannot afford them on my
own. This is really painful to me. I am alone. I am alone but I cannot
understand what is the main reason that resulted in such a situation.
Where did my husband go wrong? Why was he killed? That's what I want to
know.

	Today they are still alive, they are still working, they are still the
police of the government. What about myself?

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, Mrs Buthelezi. I am going to give you
attention after I have asked a very difficult question. We also realise
that you are now lonely. Sometimes if somebody is wounded we can say we
can send that person to consult the doctors, but now as far as you are
concerned you are alone. It is very difficult for us. I would request you
to tell us who is next to you?

MS BUTHELEZI: It is the sister of my cousin.

CHAIRPERSON: I will ask you a few questions so that we can understand the
issue. You are saying Samson Buthelezi was your husband. He left the
house, saying that he was attending the festival. Can you explain to us
what type of life was your husband leading?

MS BUTHELEZI: He was an ordinary man.

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	4	MS L BUTHELEZI

CHAIRPERSON: Was he working, was he a political activist? Anything that
you remember concerning your husband, because we don't know him. You can
help us by giving us an image, the picture.

MS BUTHELEZI: He was working, he was not a political activist.

CHAIRPERSON: You told us that he went to attend a festival. Could you
explain to us what was happening during that time of the festival?

MS BUTHELEZI: I have never attended a festival. I just know the name
festival, I don't know what is meant by it, what usually happens. Even my
husband did not attend the festival before. It was the first time. He
only took the children and promised to come back. He said I will take the
children to the place then I will come back. The following day, when the
children came, they only knew that their father is dead. He will not
again be entering the gate.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you explain to us the child your husband took to the
festival, is he realated to you?

MS BUTHELEZI: Yes, he is our child.

MS BUTHELEZI: It is also possible that when the child asked the father to
send the children somewhere, my father maybe had some question where they
were going to. I didn't hear that question. I can't even know whether
that was done.

CHAIRPERSON: You said in your statement the following day when the child
came home, as you think what Paulus explained to you, where did he last
see the father?

MS BUTHELEZI: He said the father took him to the festival, then he
returned. Well, he just heard the sound of a gun while he was in the
festival. He did not know that the father was a victim there. As usual,
when something like

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	5	MS L BUTHELEZI

like that happened, people used to question many questions and get
answers for themselves.

CHAIRPERSON: What question did Paulus question about himself when he
heard the gun sound, or did they just leave without questioning?

MS BUTHELEZI: They didn't question anything, because they were outside
the stadium. There were soldiers and police. They could not know what was
happening inside the stadium. Usually when the police are there,
everybody is protected. As they were there they knew that they were also
protected because the police are there.

CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything maybe the family members who managed to
look at the corpse, what happened exactly?

MS BUTHELEZI: What the family members saw was that the corpse was
wounded, the body was shot. There is our child who managed to say what
type of gun had been used.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, Mrs Buthelezi. I will give the other
Commissioners an opportunity to help you in the explanation of your
issue. Yasmin Sooka?

MS SOOKA: Mamma, do you have any records from the court case that you
still have in your possession?

MS BUTHELEZI: Do you mean where it is maybe written? Like a dead man?

MS SOOKA: Yes.

MS BUTHELEZI: Yes, we do have it, but there is my boy who can explain
further about that.

MS SOOKA: Mamma, what we can do is, we are able to take a statement from
your son and also get copies of all the documents that you have, so we
can find out more about the matter.

	Just one more question. Your son Paulus, was he not

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	6	MS L BUTHELEZI

injured in any way?

MS BUTHELEZI: No, he wasn't injured.

MS SOOKA: Did he see what had happened?

MS BUTHELEZI: No, he never, he didn't see anything. He was leaving that
time. When he arrived at home he found out that his father is dead.

MS SOOKA: Did he tell you, was there a meeting in the stadium, what was
happening on that particular day?

MS BUTHELEZI: He never told me about a meeting. He told me that there was
a festival, people were dancing.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Mamma.

CHAIRPERSON: Wynand Malan?

MR MALAN: Mrs Buthelezi, how old is Paulus now, your son?

MS BUTHELEZI: He was born in 1967.

MR MALAN: Were any people shot at the festival that you know of?

MS BUTHELEZI: There were some, yes.

MR MALAN: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Yasmin Sooka?

MS SOOKA: Mamma, I just want to clear up one thing with you. You say that
your husband was brought by the soldiers from the stadium. But later on
in your evidence you said that there were policemen appearing in court.
So were it policemen who shot your husband?

MS BUTHELEZI: It is like that. They were responsible.

MS SOOKA: Not the soldiers?

MS BUTHELEZI: No.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

MR MALAN: I am coming back on the same tack. Were the soldiers, did they
say they were also at the stadium, at the festival, or where did you meet
with them? Did you see them NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	7	MS L BUTHELEZI

at the hospital?

MS BUTHELEZI: No, I didn't see the soldiers. The sister told me that the
soldiers brought the corpse to the hospital. The soldiers just found the
corpse and brought the corpse to the hospital, because they were there to
safeguard everybody was there.

MR MALAN: Thank you. Just to get the record straight. The sister told you
that the soldiers told her that the police shot your husband? Is that how
you learnt of it?

MS BUTHELEZI: Yes.

MR MALAN: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: It is also possible that even now you have not yet
questioned your son Paulus and that to find out what was exactly the
motive of attending the festival.

MS BUTHELEZI: I could not ask the motive was of attending the festival,
because everybody went there just to dance and to enjoy. I knew that they
are also attending there to enjoy themselves.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you very much, Mrs Buthelezi. You have given
different places where we have to go and search for information, like the
hospital, where we feel maybe we can get records and statements. Another
thing that I need to tell you, is that we hope that those who were
responsible in the ADF administration, when they arrived to take the
statements, when they sent them to the Commission, it is going to help
many people like your family. So that you can have peace, the peace in
your heart and in the family. Lastly, we would like to ask you the last
question. There are many people who are involved or lost their beloved
ones, like their husbands. If you think very hard, in your opinion, what
can the Commission do, what we can do in fact, NELSPRUIT
HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	8	MS L BUTHELEZI

to make you have peace at least, the Commission?

MS BUTHELEZI: Chiefly, what worries me is that the law must take its
course. I am very worried about the children, their future is going to be
doomed, because they are no longer attending school. We had an aim of
education. Now it is very difficult for me. It is indeed that everybody
alive is going to die. I will forgive if this was eventual death. If
possible, if I could know the reason of his death. Now I have got
problems rearing the children, they are at home. I don't know what the
cause of his death was. I don't know really. If maybe that person is a
police, does he have the right to do anything where he can not be found
guilty, if that is wrong?

CHAIRPERSON: We are very sympathetic with you. We have taken note of all
that you have told us. I can only just go back and ask you a question,
that the children are no longer attending school because of this issue or
what happened? Can you give me the names?

MS BUTHELEZI: Yes, they are in Std 10. The government is still helping
us. When furthering their education it is very difficult, although I am
keen in furthering their education. If the father was alive, we could
manage as a family to further their education.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. We are going to make sure that we
always contact you so that we can continue this matter together. Thank
you.



	------------







NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA



