
	1	C BUTHULEZI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23.07.1996	NAME:	CHRISTINA BUTHULEZI

CASE:		-		SOWETO

DAY 2

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: As we indicated earlier on we are grateful to have many
people who are coming here, not to give their testimonies, but to express
their solidarity. Again we are grateful to have Ovavus Sulu. It is really
a source of encouragement to have him even at the time when we were not
celebrating liberation, but taking a painful journey of looking at the
scars of the apartheid. Once more we are grateful to have you.

	I will then ask the first witness for today, the second witness for
today to, Christina Buthulezi, to come forward and take the oath.
Christina, I go to you. I would like to ask you to take an oath before
the Commission.

CHRISTINA BUTHULEZI: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Lady, we would like you to tell the Commission more about
yourself and how it came that you are now sitting in a wheelchair.

MS BUTHULEZI: I am Christina Buthulezi. This is a cold Wednesday. It was
1976, June 16. I was going to school and I was not aware that there will
be a demonstration.

CHAIRPERSON: I would like to disturb you a bit. Can you just explain to
us your home background and tell us how many are you at home.

MS BUTHULEZI: At home we are six. There are three boys and three girls.
One boy passed away. We are left with my

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	2	C BUTHULEZI

father. He is not working. I have a small child by the name of Ayanda.
She was six years on the 24th of June and my sister next to me is Bongi.
When I got injured she was still young.

CHAIRPERSON: You may please continue and tell us more about the school
you attended at the time when the June 16 riots started.

MS BUTHULEZI: I was schooling at Senoane Junior Secondary. My principal
was Mr Gabindin. I was doing standard seven. On the day I got injured, on
the 16th, as I have already said I was not aware that there would be a
demonstration. We were preparing ourselves to write our exams. A group of
children came. They told us that we will be demonstrating. As we were
doing maths, history in Afrikaans it was too difficult for us to
understand those subjects. We were marching, it was quiet. We were
fighting for our rights. We were travelling from one school to another.

	When we arrived at Morris Isaacs School we found that they had already
left the school and they had left us behind. The others were at Orlando.
When we were about to arrive at Mfolo Park they stopped us and they gave
us the news that there is a child who has been injured and his name was
Hector Petersen. After hearing about the death of Hector Petersen we were
so angry as students and we started burning everything, anything that
belonged to the Government. The way it was it was so difficult. We were
all afraid. When I came back home after the demonstration I was afraid.
My parents were so strict. He told me that when he came back he saw some
children who were so angry and everything was burning outside. I just
kept quiet and I told my father that I was not at the demonstration.

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE

	3	C BUTHULEZI

	Late that afternoon my aunt took my books and I decided I will go fetch
my books. As I was coming back I saw police vehicles coming by. There
were so many of them. They were a convoy shooting around at random. That
is just when I got injured. I was unconscious and I regained my
consciousness after three days.

CHAIRPERSON: Maybe, if I may disturb you. Please explain to the
Commission that when you were coming back from your aunt's place with
your books, where was it actually? Where was your aunt's place.

MS BUTHULEZI: It is not so far away from my place. It is just one, two
streets apart. As I was coming by, just before crossing, I was on the
pavement and that is where they shot me. I fell down immediately.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you see the police vehicles approaching you? Maybe
explain to us the scene. What happened exactly? Were the police shooting
at random or were they actually directing to you? Actually, what was
happening?

MS BUTHULEZI: There were a group of students, pupils. Some offices were
on fire. As the police vehicle was approaching they were already
shooting. Just when, as I saw them, the police vehicle I was trying to go
back where I was coming from, but it was late then. Lo and behold, I was
shot. I was not the only one who was injured. There were some others. I
do not know some of them, but some I do know. We were hospitalised
together.

	What hurts me most is at the hospital they would come with firearms.
They would actually point guns at us lying on the beds asking us do you
know power. Were you a leader at school in any way? There was actually a
time when they brought a picture where Petersen was lying down after he
was SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE

	4	C BUTHULEZI

shot. The girl that was next to Hector on the picture, they were thinking
I am the one. They actually insisted that I must say yes, I am the one.
Some, when they came to the hospital, some were phoning actually, some
were coming in person at home to check whether I am back from the
hospital. Now, one doctor that I cannot remember quite well thought that
why were they disturbing me because they were carrying firearms. I could
not fight with them. Why would they not come in peace to talk to me,
converse with me instead of bringing firearms and intimidating me in the
hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: Maybe it will help you. Please switch off your mike. At the
time when you gained your consciousness, before they came with their
firearms, would you remember when the doctors told you that you cannot
walk anymore, you are paralysed, because you say you regained
consciousness in the hospital. Do you remember what happened exactly
because we, as the Commission, we should see to it that that is where you
were injured and what we could do.

MS BUTHULEZI: You know, when I regained my consciousness, I felt so numb
and so heavy and I was thinking somehow that maybe I was even trying to
run away from the hospital. After some time I asked one of the doctors as
to what happened, if he could explain to me. I would like to stand up,
but I cannot. I want to go to the ladies, I cannot. Was he trying to run
away? Please explain what happened, because I do not remember. Then he
said, please lie down, I will be back to you. As the days went by they
came back to me and they told me that after five years I will be walking.
It is just that there are minor things that are wrong with my spine, but
up till today I am still on the wheelchair, I cannot walk.

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	5	C BUTHULEZI

CHAIRPERSON: Maybe you can explain that after you were discharged from
the hospital, what happened to your life.

MS BUTHULEZI: When I was discharged, got back from the hospital many
people use to give me moral support. Even my own family although my mum
was so weak. Even now I believe that she died because of my being injured
because she left her work so that she could take care of me at home. The
community, our neighbours use to come pay visits encouraging me that I
should not be worried. I was actually fighting for our rights. I could
not understand, though, as to why they were saying those things, but
people were coming by and they were telling me those words of
encouragement up to the point where I was strong.

	I never got any kind of compensation. However, some of us were, I mean,
we use to ask ourselves whether did you get compensation or not? Some did
get some form of compensation and, yet, some of us never. My parents
tried to fight and push statements about my being injured. I think they
were threatened somehow. They were being told that I was a leader, a
political leader. I was surprised, really, because I did not know and I
was actually lost, I did not know what was happening.

CHAIRPERSON: Maybe you can go on ahead and relate to us how do you make a
living?

MS BUTHULEZI: With some help that I get from Friday Mavuso, he took me
when I was doing my matric. Just when he started his organisation of
SHARP. That is where I learnt so much, I was equipped. Even today I am
still working there. The little that I receive, I share it with my family.

CHAIRPERSON: Maybe before I ask the other Commissioners to pose questions
to you, can you tell us more about what you

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	6	C BUTHULEZI

wish to see happening.

MS BUTHULEZI: I do not know what to say. I would like to receive some
medication, medical treatment. Right now I am in a wheelchair. It is not
even my wheelchair, I borrowed it somewhere. Even on Sunday, I did not
have a wheelchair. They are very expensive. I would like the Commission
to help me in this problem. I have a child. I would like my child to be
helped, to be paid for at school.

CHAIRPERSON: I would like to thank you and I would like also to ask the
other Commissioners to ask you more about your story. That will be Joyce
Seroke.

MS SEROKE: Christina, you told us you were from a demonstration. I would
like to know whether, at the time you got shot, you were still toy-toying
or you were going home?

MS BUTHULEZI: I had already left the group. I was around my place at home.

MS SEROKE: You told us that while you were in hospital they came to ask
you questions. They asked you whether you knew what power is. Can you
please tell us what is your understanding of power? What is power?

MS BUTHULEZI: I was so angry at the time and when they asked me about
power I just told them that they only know the power which is in the
power foam plus, the Omo soap. This angered them very much. That is why
they started bringing guns. They started believing that I was the leader,
I know everything.

MS SEROKE: According to your own standing, the way you understand power,
what was power at that time?

MS BUTHULEZI: My understanding of power as we were fighting for our
rights as children, we were doing it through power.

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE

	7	C BUTHULEZI

MS SEROKE: Maybe, in other words, you are saying while you were
toy-toying you were saying power. Power meaning amandla.

MS BUTHULEZI: Yes, we were saying power to the blacks, power to the black
people.

MS SEROKE: The last one. You told us that you were assisted by Friday who
call you to join the SHARP organisation. Can you tell us exactly what
SHARP stands for?

MS BUTHULEZI: SHARP is an organisation for the disabled people. It tries
to end the poverty so that people who are disabled must not go to the
street and ask for charity. It gives the disabled some literacy, we also
have a computer school.

MS SEROKE: What does S H A R P stand for?

MS BUTHULEZI: It is Self Help Association of Paraplegics in Soweto. It
was for the people who are in wheelchairs, but we discovered that even
the people who are limping, amputees, they are having problems same as us.

MS SEROKE: Thank you very much.,

CHAIRPERSON: Hugh Lewin, Yasmin Sooka.

MS SOOKA: Christina, I just want to ask you in practical terms, what has
being paralysed mean for you because it is quite important for us to be
able to assess how this will impact on your life in the next few years.
How do you care for yourself and who takes care of you? You have
mentioned to us that you have a little girl, you have a child as well and
that might be very, very difficult for you. You have also told us that
you do not have a wheelchair. If you can just give us a little more
detail about that please.

MS BUTHULEZI: By being paralysed I have discovered that I

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	8	C BUTHULEZI

am paralysed for life now. Then to have a child, it was a blessing to me.
Especially a baby girl. I was very happy when I discovered that I was
pregnant, but I did not tell anybody at home. I was afraid that they will
accuse me that I am on a wheelchair and I am pregnant. I only told my
younger sister here whom I share everything with. When I was in hospital
they were also fighting that why am I pregnant because I am in a
wheelchair, but I told them that I will manage. I have managed for so
many years. There is nothing that would stop me not to be able to take
care of my baby. I will always share with her. She is big, she is
beautiful. She attends school now. I manage, I do not how, but God is
there. He is helping in all the ways and my family too who are very
protective. They are there for me.

MS SOOKA: Do you need special medication, are you in pain sometimes? Do
any of those things happen to you?

MS BUTHULEZI: So far I am fine, but I have got a problem since I have got
injured, headache. That I am always, even now, I am having it. I do not
know how it can be cured. I even have a fear this day that anything can
happen to me.

MS SOOKA: Do you attend hospital?

MS BUTHULEZI: Clinic.

MS SOOKA: Do you have to pay for those treatments?

MS BUTHULEZI: Yes, I do pay.

MS SOOKA: How much do you?

MS BUTHULEZI: If I go to the specialist it depends because we pay
something like R70,00, but in Barras it is R13,00 sometimes.

MS SOOKA: It seems quite clear that the police mistook you for Antoinette
Sithole, Hector Petersen's sister. How has this impacted on your life?

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE

	9	C BUTHULEZI

MS BUTHULEZI: Will you please repeat the question?

MS SOOKA: It seems quite clear to me that the police mistook you for
Antoinette Sithole, Hector Petersen's sister and that is why they
harassed you so constantly, but how has this impacted on your own life?

MS BUTHULEZI: Since the police have mistaken me of being Antoinette
Sithole I told them they must check my uniform. I was not dressed like
Antoinette Sithole. I was not in when I have got injured. They must just
go to my school and check the uniform and see the design. They will see
the difference.

MS SOOKA: Just one last question. You were in standard seven at the time,
but now you have matric. Did you do that with the help of SHARP as well?

MS BUTHULEZI: No, after I was discharged from the hospital, in 1979 then
my principal came to me and told me that I must come back to school
fulltime. Then I went back to school with the help of my principal.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Russell Ally.

DR ALLY: Just two very short questions. You did not receive any
compensation you said, but have you ever received any grant, any
disability grant?

MS BUTHULEZI: Yes. I started in 1978 to get the disability grant.

DR ALLY: And that is still continuing?

MS BUTHULEZI: It was closed in 1982, 1980 somewhere there. I stayed for
something like five years not receiving it. Then I started when I got my
baby, Ayanda, I started to apply for it because it will help me to bring
up my child.

DR ALLY: And are you receiving it now or have you not had

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	10	C BUTHULEZI

anything yet?

MS BUTHULEZI: I receive it now.

DR ALLY: And the wheelchair, were you never ever given a wheelchair, your
own wheelchair when it was discovered that you were paralysed?

MS BUTHULEZI: No, I have bought it.

DR ALLY: You bought it yourself, you were not given one?

MS BUTHULEZI: Till today I was never given a wheelchair.

DR ALLY: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Piet. Is there any other things that you would like to tell
the Commission?

MS BUTHULEZI: In fact I have always been asking myself one question. What
kind of people should be compensated, those who are getting compensation
and why others are not compensated. This is the question that I always
ask myself everyday. Even when I ask people who understand more about
this they cannot even tell me how they got the money. When I ask them how
they got the money they could not explain anything to me. I would be
happy to know if the Commission can assist me to know how to get the
money.

CHAIRPERSON: We would like to thank you very much. The Commission has a
Committee called Reparations Committee. It is called Reparations and
Rehabilitation Committee. This Committee is busy at the moment trying to
investigate as to how people can be helped to their satisfaction from
1960 to 1963. Your suffering is different from any other people
sufferings and I believe that you and your organisation, you will try and
contact us with information as to how we can try and help people like
you. We will try and ask you if we ever have meetings so that you can
come and help us.

	What I would like to thank you for is the evidence that SOWETO
HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	11	C BUTHULEZI

you have placed before the Commission and I am so happy because you are
one of those people who survived the 1976 riot. We are so glad because
you managed to survive to fight, you managed to get everything. You have
got a child and continue with your life. I think a person like you is
seen as a freedom fighter. You have been able to go through all these
burnings and we believe that the spirit that you have will help other
people to know that there is life even after such great sufferings. We
would like to thank you lady.

	------------------------------









































SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE

