	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 25.03.1997		NAME: MATSHINGELANA CAMBANA

DAY: 2				

----------------------------------------------------------

MATSHINGELANA CAMBANA: (sworn states)

MR SANDI: Mrs Cambana who are you going to talk about?

MS CAMBANA: Gavu Zadunge.

MR SANDI: He was executed with the others?

MS CAMBANA: Yes.

MR SANDI: How were you related?

MS CAMBANA: He was my husband.

MR SANDI: The incidents prior to his execution, do you remember?

MS CAMBANA: They burned down our house and our livestock. I could not
sleep at home. The boers and the Chief were after me. My house was burnt
down. My plantations were also destroyed.

	I had to go back home. They were after me.

	He had to give himself in, because they were destroying everything that
we had. Even the Chief sent a message that I should go back to my own
home as he gave himself in.

MR SANDI: Was he a member of Congo?

MS CAMBANA: Yes. Yes they would use him to send messages amongst the
Congo members.

MR SANDI: In the court of law during the case, did you see him?

MS CAMBANA: No I did not see him. He was in Flagstaff for a while, then
Kokstad. That is where they were detained.

After a while a policeman came who came to fetch men. He was in Pretoria
then. These men came back, six men.

MR SANDI: When he was in Pretoria did he write a letter home saying what
is happening?

MS CAMBANA: He would write a lot of letters. I even sent him some money.
He did not use all of it. He sent some of it back, saying that he was now
going to die.

	The last letter he wrote he said that we must pray and trust in God. We
should trust in nobody else but the Lord. He said that the Government
would help my children and myself.

MR SANDI: How old were your children?

MS CAMBANA: I was breast feeding this child. Now she is married with her
own ten children.

	When people were being shot in Nqozo I was nine months pregnant. He was
arrested that time I was breast feeding. As I would run away from my own
home and sleep outside it would be with an infant.

	Sometimes it would rain and there were people who were kind enough to
take me into their own home with this infant.

MR SANDI: Do you have request that you would like to add to the statement?

MS CAMBANA: As I said before I would like my husband to be buried in
Ngquza. Also if my grandchildren could be educated. My son-in-law is
unemployed. She feeds all these children and supports them.

MR SANDI: According to the statement one of your other requests is that
job opportunities are a major need in this area.

MS CAMBANA: It is a major need in this area because so

many people are unemployed. Our children are unemployed.



MR SANDI: Is that all madam?

MS CAMBANA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Thank you. I will hand over to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: I realise that there is something common amongst these four
people. That as they were going to be attacked they would have be
commanded to go back to their own homes. 	They were all attacked in a
similar way. Their crops would be burnt.

	I would like to know. Was there an organisation that would attack you,
your homes and burn your crops?

MS CAMBANA: We were attacked from the Chief's side because he did not
want Congo in his district. The man whose name I will not divulge would
tell us that he had weapons, guns and that he was going to kill each and
every Congo member. This man helped me by telling me what was going to
happen.

CHAIRPERSON: What were your husbands accused of?

MS CAMBANA: They were accused of killing the Chief. They denied having
attacked the Chief.

	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: The question I am going to ask, all witnesses can answer
them, one by one.

	Would the police say anything about the intentions concerning Congo?

MRS MAGALWANE: We did not go to jail, because the Chief and the police
were very deceptive. You would never go and visit a member of your
family, because the police, the boers they would beat us up. They worked
together with

the Chief of the district.

CHAIRPERSON: When the police were beating you up, would they say anything?

MRS MAGALWANE: They would ask what Congo is all about,



Congo that wanted to go beyond the Government. And what is a black person
after all?

CHAIRPERSON: Do other witnesses want to add something?

MS MAGALWANE: I would add something as I go to Bizana a lot. They would
sjambok, especially a policeman called Du Toit. And you would ask to see
a member of your family. Then he would say that the men that are against
the Government are not allowed to have visitors. He would come out with
this sjambok, this Du Toit and he would threaten us.

	We never saw our husbands. I saw him in Kokstad in the court of law. I
was told to go home. My husband was sentenced.

	In Pretoria they said that we should not even bother, because there is
nothing that we could do. A few men went. One of them gave in a
statement. He saw them just before they were executed. They tried, they
begged the police so that they should not be executed, especially at the
same time.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you madam.

MS MAGULWANA: Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: I would request Rev Xundu to thank the people.

REV XUNDU: Thank you Mr Chairperson.

	A man from back home who was thanking the struggles of our people for
liberation, he said the white man endeavoured to destroy the black man,
but the black man rose up, fought in the struggle until he won, until such

time that the white man was a laughing stock.

	We salute your husbands and the men that fought in the struggle. I want
to say that you yourselves are heroes. You stand here and say to us in
all earnestness and truth that your people fought for liberation.

	We thank you and your families for having come before us so that South
Africa knows that the people who struggled for liberation are not only
people that come from abroad, but women and men who were in the struggle
fought day and night for this liberation.

	We thank you that even your requests that you have put before us and
that we are going to put before the President, are requests that are not
only going to benefit you personally, but also South Africa. You could
have easily have gone to some form of exile, sold your bodies or
anything, but you stayed at home and you stood strong.

	The Commission thank you on behalf of the people of South Africa.

COMMISSIONS ADJOURNS































