
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	24-07-1996	NAME: NOMBULELO CHARLIE

CASE: QUEENSTOWN

DAY 3



NOMBULELO CHARLIE:	(sworn states)

REVD FINCA:	We welcome you Nombulelo. Asking that before we hand over to
Adv Denzil Potgieter, that you should put on your earphones in readiness
to answer the questions that are going to be posed to you by the Advocate.

ADV POTGIETER:	Good afternoon Miss Charlie. Welcome here. The statement
that was given to us, came from your mother who gave us some idea of the
background to the incident that happened to you in August 1985, but we
are happy that you are here personally so that you can give us a first
hand account of actually what happened on this particular day.

	So please relax and tell us exactly what happened when you were injured.

N CHARLIE:	It was in August 1985 when we were at school the big boys
instructed us to leave school because in the afternoon we were going to a
meeting, so we did exactly that.

	In the afternoon we went to Masesames School, but I did not get inside,
I stood outside, because it was full in the room. So we talked that they
were forcing us to be taught in Afrikaans, so we toyi-toyed and I decided
to go home.

	The following day at about five o'clock, I was on my way to the shop to
buy paraffin. As I was walking in a passage going back home, I saw a
hippo from afar, but I couldn't see who the policemen were who were
driving this

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			N CHARLIE

hippo.

	That was the last time I can remember, then I don't know what later
happened thereafter, because I think they shot me and left me there.

	Someone picked me up from there and they did not know me, they took me
there and someone just left there. My whole body was covered with blood,
they hit me on my eye. I could not be taken to a Doctor because those
days you would be arrested if you were taken to any Doctor, so I kept
indoors.

	Late at night, the police came and knocked. I said to my mother, oh,
please, hide me. They came, then my mother saw one called Cross saying
VIVA. Then this policeman asked where is Nombulelo, then my mother said,
I don't know Nombulelo.

	Then they said is the child here who has been shot on the eye, then they
took my brother away. After three weeks my aunt who used to work for a
particular Doctor asked me to go and hand myself over.

	So they took me to a Doctor and the Doctor said I was to go to a
Hospital in East London, so I did go there. I was there for about two
weeks and they said they were going to take my whole eye out, because it
was spoilt, so I had to go back home and wait for the Specialist.

	My brother gave me the money for travelling because my parents were not
working at the time. I then went back to hospital and then they were
going to take out the eye and put in an artificial eye and they were
asking for R285-00, then I agreed, so they put in this artificial eye and
we paid the R285-00 for this.

	I used to go for treatment frequently, I still go for

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			N CHARLIE

the treatment even now. Then one bullet was here on the forehead and it
was taken out and one that was in the head, could not be taken out.

	I sometimes have headaches. Some other times I would go to the Hospital
in Sterkspruit for treatment, but now I've come back. That is all I have
to say.

	Even those policemen who shot me, never got arrested.

ADV POTGIETER:	Now you said that when this incident happened, you were
still at school. You were doing standard 6 and how old were you?

N CHARLIE:	I was 15 years old.

ADV POTGIETER:	Now, were you on your own when you were walking to the
shop?

N CHARLIE:	Yes, I was on my own.

ADV POTGIETER:	And, was there anything going on in the street, was there
any unrest, was there any problems or was it normal and quiet?

N CHARLIE:	There was a toyi-toyi in another street. No.

ADV POTGIETER:	Was the only vehicle that you saw in this street where you
were walking, this hippo that you referred to?

N CHARLIE:	Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:	And it subsequently appeared that you were shot amongst
other things? Could anybody else except the people who were in the hippo,
have been responsible for shooting you?

N CHARLIE:	Yes, it is these people who were in the hippo that shot me,
because they were the people who were in the street where I was walking.

ADV POTGIETER:	Now you say that you were struck on your eye, you were hit
on your eye, is that correct?

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			N CHARLIE

N CHARLIE:	Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:	Is that the eye that had to be removed subsequently?

N CHARLIE:	Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:	Now, you've referred to the injury to your eye and the
bullet that was removed from your forehead, and there was another one
that you referred to in your evidence. Did you have any other injuries?

N CHARLIE:	The other bullet is in my head.

ADV POTGIETER:	So was it just the two bullets - the one in the forehead
that was taken out and the one in the head?

N CHARLIE:	The bullet in the head is still there, they could not take it
out.

ADV POTGIETER:	Okay, that's no problem. What happened after this incident
- did you continue your schooling or what happened to your schooling?

N CHARLIE:	I continued with my schooling in 1986, but my eye gave
problems and I could not write properly, but now I am not going to school.

ADV POTGIETER:	I notice that you are wearing glasses. What is the
condition of the other eye?

N CHARLIE:	I can see, but not clearly.

ADV POTGIETER:	What are you doing at this stage?

N CHARLIE:	I am just sitting at home, doing nothing.

ADV POTGIETER:	And do your parents care for you, do they look after you,
maintain you?

N CHARLIE:	They do some of the things, but they don't do everything for
me because they are unemployed.

ADV POTGIETER:	Have you got any idea who it was that shot and assaulted
you, hit you on the eye - which policeman?

N CHARLIE:	I really can't tell, because they were far at QUEENSTOWN
HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			N CHARLIE

the time.

ADV POTGIETER:	Have you ever consulted a lawyer or anybody else in
connection with a claim for your injuries?

N CHARLIE:	In 1988 a certain man took me by the name of Mr Mbona and
Nkosana Nogani, took me to a hotel in Lututu and said there was an
attorney there, so I went there and gave him my statement and he said he
would call me. Then the person who had taken me there, Mr Mbona died.

	But I was never again called to those lawyers.

ADV POTGIETER:	Can you still recall the name of the lawyer that you saw?

N CHARLIE:	I really can't remember well.

ADV POTGIETER:	Do you know where the lawyer was from?

N CHARLIE:	They said he was from Grahamstown.

ADV POTGIETER:	From Grahamstown? The other person that was with, Mr ... -
the one person died you said and there was another person with when you
went to see this lawyer. Is that other person still available, can he be
contacted?

N CHARLIE:	Unfortunately they both died. This other one died recently.

ADV POTGIETER:	Is there any other way in which we could trace the lawyer
involved, find out who it was because it could be of some assistance?

N CHARLIE:	I can't think of anybody, because even my brother did not
know. I just went to the hotel where the lawyer was with these two men
who died, so there is just no way in which we could get information
leading to the lawyer.

ADV POTGIETER:	Okay, we can think about that problem later. Is there
anything, any request that you want to make to the Commission, Miss
Charlie?

N CHARLIE:	I'll request the Commission to help me

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			N CHARLIE

because if I had continued with my education, I may have helped my
parents, because those I was with at school are now teachers and nurses,
so my aim was to work for my parents.

ADV POTGIETER:	We have noted that and we want to thank you for coming
personally and telling us what happened. I will now hand you back to the
Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Any questions? Dr Romachela.

DR RAMASHELA:	Miss Charlie, I am going to ask you a few questions. And
these questions are related to your request to receive a skills training
course. The first question is what kind of treatment are you receiving
now and who is paying for it?

N CHARLIE:	It is my father.

DR RAMASHELA:	What kind of treatment is it?

N CHARLIE:	I go to East London to get treatment and they just give me
some medicine and Panado tablets, then I come back.

DR RAMASHELA:	Can I repeat the question. You say you have difficulty
writing. Can you explain what happened to your fingers?

N CHARLIE:	Nothing happened to my hand.

DR RAMASHELA:	Am I correct, in your statement you say you have difficulty
with writing, is that correct?

N CHARLIE:	Yes, I have difficulty.

DR RAMASHELA:	Is it related to the eyes or something else? I want you to
think a little bit. You are giving us some ideas about skills training.
What are you thinking about in particular?

N CHARLIE:	To be able to write because when I write, I don't write
properly, I don't write in a straight line.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			N CHARLIE

DR RAMASHELA:	But you can read a little bit, can't you? Do you remember
the name of the Doctor you went to see before you were referred to East
London?

N CHARLIE:	You mean there in Sterkstroom?

DR RAMASHELA:	The Doctor in East London?

N CHARLIE:	The second one was Van Wyk, I can't remember the one who
transferred me to East London. The name of the Doctor is De Haak. De Haak
is now in Cape Town.

DR RAMASHELA:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Are there any other questions? Your story is very painful
because you are young.

	Because at your age, you don't have an eye, you have a bullet in your
head and really your life is not good. We thank you for your story. This
Commission is going to make a follow up. If there is any other things we
would like to know, we shall come back to you.

	For now we thank you and we ask you to go back to your seat. We shall
meet at quarter to two.

	--------------------

