


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 18.07.96 			NAME: K M ROSINAH CHOLO

CASE: 00543 - PIETERSBURG

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

MR MANTHATA: I have been asked while the witness is coming to the stand
to just give you a run-down of all the cases we'll be hearing.

	The first witness Mrs Rosina Chola will be giving evidence in connection
with a murder. The second witness will be Maputi Tlhathla, it's an
assault. The third will be Bakgane Baloi in the case of Johannes Baloi,
it's a murder case.

	We'll break for tea at 10H30, we'll resume at 11 o'clock when Lesiba
Sasa will be giving evidence on death and property destruction. After
that Sidwell Ramutschla will give evidence in a severe assault case,
Makro Muthla Mafafo will give evidence in a case of being shot and
wounded and then Eddie Simon Baloi will give evidence on his own behalf
in connection with detention, solitary confinement and severe assault.

We hope to have arrived at this stage by lunch when we'll break till 2
o'clock when Philip Madraae will be giving evidence in an assault case,
We have Mrs Cholo at the stand here. Mr Manthata will be the chairman for
the day and I think I herewith dispense with my duty for the moment.

	Before we start, let me first introduce the commissioners. On my left
hand we have Professor Piet Meiring and then next is Russel Ally and on
my right hand side we have Wynand Malan. Wynand has already introduced
me, Tom Manthata. Mrs Rossina Cholo is now in front of us. Now we will
ask Professor Piet Meiring to ask Mrs Rosina to take the oath before she
starts.



MRS ROSINA CHOLO:	(sworn states)

DR ALLY: Mrs Cholo, you've come this morning to speak about a grand
daughter who was killed. Before I ask you in your own words to relate
what happened, I would just like to say that today, this morning, quite a
few of the cases which we will be dealing with took place in Hamathlala
where it appears that there was a chiefly dispute, and that this dispute
was also affected by some f the political events of that period, late
1970's, early 1980's, and the dispute often revolved around different
political allegiances. I would just like to say that if there are any
other members in the audience who were also victims of this dispute, but
have not yet made statements, we do have statement takers here, they can
approach any of the members of the Truth Commission, because we don't
want the impression to be created that because most of the disputes which
we will be dealing with today seem come from one side of the political
conflict, that the Truth Commission is in any way taking sides in this
conflict. Those are the statements which we received but for the Truth
Commission it is important that we hear from all sides of the political
conflict. So I say again, if there are people in the audience who have
not yet made statements which show other sides of the political conflict,
our statement takers will be only too glad to take your statements during
the course of the day.

	Mrs Cholo you are coming to speak to us about what happened to your
grand daughter, Frieda, in 1980. I'm going to ask you now in your own
words and in your own time to tell us about this event. Thank you.

MRS CHOLO: What happened in my house, I was in my house with my grand
daughter and her mother. When they came they came by storm and told us to
leave. We went with them, we found a car which was full of people and we
wanted to hear why we were being called, because they didn't tell us when
they took us at home. They chopped my grand daughter and we heard her
crying when we...(intervention) (witness overcome)

DR ALLY: Please continue.

MRS CHOLO: I'm not finished, I will continue. They burned our house. I
think I'm finished now.

DR ALLY: If I can just ask you some questions to help us understand what
happened. You say that they came to your house, who was this they, who
were the people that came to your house?

MRS CHOLO: I don't know them.

DR ALLY: Do you know what the reason was for them coming to your house?

MRS CHOLO: I don't know they just came and they just took us and they
wanted to leave with us. I don't know why they were there in the first
place.

DR ALLY: Where did they want to take you to?

MRS CHOLO: They took us to a car and when we arrived at that car we found
a lot of people in there, and they didn't tell us anything why they took
us.

DR ALLY: The people in the car, did you recognise anyone?

MRS CHOLO: No one. I didn't know any, even the people who took us, I
don't know them.

DR ALLY: Our researchers have tried to find out what was happening in
your village during this period and from the research which they have
done, it seems that, and I would like you to tell me whether this is the
case, that this conflict was as a result of an instruction given that
people had to move from one village to another village, from Gomo village
to Simaneng village, is that what was happening at the time, do you
remember?

MRS CHOLO: From where, I can't hear properly, my ears aren't so good.
Gomo was our chief. You mean from Gomo to Simaneng?

DR ALLY: Is that what was happening, you were asked to move from one
village to another village? What was the problem, why were they moving
you from Gomo to Simaneng?

MRS CHOLO: I don't know why?

DR ALLY: But these people, did they introduce themselves, who they are,
where were they coming from?

MRS CHOLO: No we don't know.

DR ALLY: This chief, Chief Gomo, did he say anything about that?

MRS CHOLO: No.

MRS CHOLO: When the chief was on the run, who was left behind?

MRS CHOLO: No one. Everyone was being chased, no one was supposed to stay
behind.

DR ALLY: Now that everyone was being chased did you all go to Simaneng?

MRS CHOLO: Yes others were already gone. We were left behind.

DR ALLY: Some were?

MRS CHOLO: Yes some were at Simaneng. We the people who were left behind,
we are the ones who were being chased.

DR ALLY: Why were you left?

MRS CHOLO: We wanted to stay there because that's where we belong. We
wanted to know why we must move.

DR ALLY: You were not told that you must move to Simaneng?

MRS CHOLO: No.

DR ALLY: Was it not because you didn't want to go to Simaneng?

MRS CHOLO: No we didn't.

DR ALLY: When you grand daughter was killed during this time, she was
struck on the head. Did you lose anything else. Did you lose your hut or
your house or cattle or cows. What else did you lose, what else happened
besides your grand daughter being killed?

MRS CHOLO: My cows and my herds, before they killed my daughter.

DR ALLY: Where are you living now, in which village?

MRS CHOLO: In Simaneng.

DR ALLY: And what is it that you would like the Truth Commission to do,
how do you think the Truth Commission can be of assistance to you?

MRS CHOLO: I can't tell them what to do for me, but them as people who
are in law, they can see what they can help me with.

DR ALLY: And these conflicts of 1979/1980, is this still continuing or
are things peaceful and calm now or is there still tension and fighting
taking place?

MRS CHOLO: I can't hear clearly, I have a problem hearing. There are no
conflicts.

MR MALAN: Mrs Cholo, at the time of the incident when your grand daughter
was killed, you were living at Gomo village?

MRS CHOLO: Yes in Simaneng, Gomo Village.

MR MALAN: Are you living at the same place that you lived then or have
you since moved?

MRS CHOLO: Yes I'm still at the same place.

MR MALAN: You say that you are a member of the ANC, the African National
Congress. When did you become a member?

MRS CHOLO: Yes, when troubles began. To be an ANC member.

MR MALAN: Who was the leader of the African National Congress at the time?

MRS CHOLO: The person who was left. His name was Raman. His name is
Marimane.

MR MALAN: Is this Marimane the person who was staying with you at
Mathlale?

MRS CHOLO: Yes. He died because he was sick, not that he was killed.

MR MALAN: This Maremane, was he a king or chief?

MRS CHOLO: No he wasn't.

MR MALAN: Where was the chief when Maremane was the ANC leader?

MRS CHOLO: We didn't know where the chief was at the time.

These conflicts are the reason we didn't know where the chief was.

MR MALAN: This chief, did he try and tell you why he was being chased?

MRS CHOLO: I can't understand the questions clearly.

MR MALAN: You said he was chased, and you didn't know where he ran to.

MRS CHOLO: The chief ran away because there were conflicts and the people
were killing each other. They killed his younger brother, so he ran away.
We didn't know where and most people now joined the ANC.

MR MALAN: These Congress people, were they looking for the chief and they
didn't know where the chief was?

MRS CHOLO: Yes.

MR MALAN: Who chased the chief then?

MRS CHOLO: The problems and troubles made the chief to run away because
they also killed his younger brother. We don't know who killed his
younger brother, we just think the people of that village did because
they didn't want him to be the chief.

MR MALAN: The people who came to you, in your statement you refer to them
as TC's. Is that known to you, TC's?

MRS CHOLO: You mean TC people?

MR MALAN: Do you know what TC people is?

MRS CHOLO: The Congress. TC people. I don't know if those people were TC
people. You won't know, I mean you'll see people just coming and you
won't know where they're coming from and who they are.

MR MALAN: Thank you Mrs Cholo.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you Mrs Cholo for coming forward here, we can tell
that things have been very bad and we understand that they killed your
granddaughter in a very bad way. We can see what we can do. We thank you
for coming forward.

