
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 19.11.96	NAME: VUYELWA CORRIEN CHUMGWA

					

CASE: EAST LONDON - BISHO MASSACRE II

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

MR POTGIETER: Reverend Xundu.

REVEREND XUNDU: I would like to call upon Vuyelwa Chumgwa Nomalisa
Hlekani, Phakamile William Duda and Ntsikelelo Dugmore Flepu.

VUYELWA CORRIEN CHUMGWA: (sworn states)

DORIS NOMALISA HLEKANI: (sworn states)

PHAKAMILE WILLIAM DUDA: (sworn states)

MGCINENI JACKSON BLOM: (sworn states)

MR POTGIETER: Thank you very much. Vuyelwa Chumgwa will be facilitated by
Hlengiwe Mkhize. Doris Hlekani by Ntsiki Sandi. Phakamile Duda by Tiny
Maya. Mgcineni Jackson Blom by Mapule Ramashala. I hand over to you.

VUYELWA CORRIEN CHUMGWA:

MS MKHIZE: I would like to welcome you, just to way you are one of those
women who had to pay a price for the freedom we have today, and I would
ask you to tell us a little about your son Zamile Terrence Nqwala, so
that we can get a understanding of who he was, what was he doing at the
time of the incidents that you have written to us about, which we call
the Bisho Massacre.

MS CHUMGWA: My son is Zamile Terrence Nqwala. He was born in Tolofiyeni.
What happened to Zamile is on the Monday the

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	1	V CHUMGWA

7th he went to school because he was a student at Thembalabantu. He was
in matric at the time. What happened is that he came back from school.
After he came back he told me that mom, I am going to the march. I then
gave him permission to do so. It was a nice sunny day. What happened is
we were at home and people with radios heard that at about one o'clock
people were being shot at Bisho. I did not take much cognisance of that.
At sunset that day my child did not come back. When he didn't come back I
just thought that he might have gone to his aunts in Mdantsane as things
were not going well at Bisho.

	On the Tuesday morning I still was not that much concerned because the
people that he had gone with like Poppa Gqode were not injured and nobody
came to me as such. On the Tuesday at about sunset I went to my
brother-in-law. He was with my sister, his wife. I asked my sister why is
my child not coming back, and Nombusa said to her husband, these were the
words Nombusa said to her husband, she asked why they were not telling me
that my child is injured. My brother-in-law then told me that my son is
at Makiwane Hospital, he has not died but he is just injured.

	On the Wednesday morning I went to fetch Nonzami Kanenda my neighbour.
We left to go to the Makiwane Hospital. A White man showed us a list of
people who had been discharged and people who had died, and he said that
Zamile Nqwala's name was not there. This man asked us to go to Frere
Hospital. Again there we met with a White man who also read a list of
people and said that my son is not there. Nonzami and I gave up and we
were walking towards the gate, we met two men who were wearing red
T-shirts. These men asked me, as I was sitting down, they asked

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	V CHUMGWA

actually Nonzame what the problem was. Nonzame then said we were looking
for my son who was apparently injured in the Bisho Massacre. They asked
for my son's name, I gave it to them. They asked for a description, I
described my son. They asked what he was wearing, I described that too.

	At the hospital that said that I must go to Cambridge mortuary where the
corpses were, sorry Westbank. We tried to find Westbank but these two men
took over and said they would go to Westbank for us. They said that I
must go home because they had taken all my son's details. They asked for
my phone number. Because I did not have a phone I would give people my
daughter's phone number who worked at Bisho. Nonzame and I went to
Mdantsane to get transport to go home. 	When we were in King Williamstown
next to the Post Office my brother-in-law works around there, we went to
tell him that my son had been injured. He said that he'd heard that he'd
been injured but at least he did not have the news that he died, so
perhaps there is still hope.

	Nonzame and I went home. On our way home we realised that our neighbours
were already at my house wanting to find out what transpired. I told them
that we still don't know what's going on. In the evening my
brother-in-law came with these two men that we had met at the hospital.
When they got in they asked for Nonganisile and of course I was there.
These men were standing by the door. These men then said Zamile has
passed away. At the time I was not too shocked as such, I was calm.
That's what happened with Zamile. I had a delayed reaction. I don't know
whether I have left anything out of the statement I am not sure.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you. I will just ask you a few questions Mamma to
clarify your story here. Can you still

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	V CHUMGWA

remember how old was he at the time of this incident, Zamile?

MS CHUMGWA: Zamile was 24 years of age. He was born in 1968.

MS MKHIZE: In your knowledge was he trained in using any weapons, do you
think as he was attending this march he had a weapon or anything like
that?

MS CHUMGWA: No, he did not have a gun, he did not have any weapon. What
drew Zamile to the march, especially by the men who were in our area, ANC
men, is because he was a marshal and he liked that job. Even on the day
that he left I told him to take a T-shirt from the wardrobe. He then said
he's got a shirt that he received from these men. These were khaki shirts
that were already prepared.

MS MKHIZE: When you ultimately got his body did you see how he was
murdered, was he shot at, can you just tell us briefly what you saw?

MS CHUMGWA: I did not see the body. The person who saw him who was
preparing everything it is Mzwandile Chumgwa. Mzwandile told me that he
saw a wound on the forehead, a bullet wound.

MS MKHIZE: Also in your statement of the tragedy you state "my health was
affected", can you tell us as to how has this affected your health?

MS CHUMGWA: My health deteriorated. I was just so heartbroken. Even after
I had gone to the Grey Hospital, after the whole deed, after the funeral
and everything I was strong when this all happened, even when my son was
buried I was still strong. But when I went to the hospital I got
medication. They asked what happened I told them I would use these
tablets. After I'd take some tablets at least I

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	V CHUMGWA

would be strong again.

MS MKHIZE: You just say you request the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission to see what it can do for me. Since we sat here yesterday we
have heard many witnesses who are talking about this incident, have you
got any suggestion as to what can be done in this area to help all those
families and parents of people who particularly died on this unfortunate
day?

MS CHUMGWA: First of all I am going to talk specifically about myself. I
am going to tell you what it is that I need and then I will refer to the
others. What I request if I could get help and if the Commission has the
strength and the authority as a woman who was supported by this child I
never went short of anything, my son would support me. In his endeavour
to give me everything when he passed away he actually did not have a
home, I was staying with people. His wish was that he would build a house
for me. I have divorced his father and his wish was that I would have a
home and he would educate his three siblings.

	I want to say something else, the perpetrator of all this, because I
don't know who it is, I have forgiven him. He did so much damage that I
have forgiven him, it is the Lord that will deal with him. The Lord will
deal with him. Whoever he is, what he did is just so huge and scary that
I have forgiven him, it is only the Lord that can deal with him. I don't
want to put a burden on the Commission because we never knew that this
would happen, that these cases would be investigated. Even the way we
were treated after this, the man spoke on the radio, he said what he did
at the Bisho Massacre he would do again. The Lord will deal with him.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you very much Ma'am. Did you think of

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	5	V CHUMGWA

pursuing civil claims? Was there a court hearing after the incidents?

MS CHUMGWA: I went to the attorneys. After there was a memorial service
with Dullah Omar in King Williamstown. He then said that the people who
had lost their loved ones should go to the attorney. I went to Smith and
Tabatha, when I got there I found two women. These women said that how
are they going to start a case that transpired in 1992, it's too long
ago. I said to them 1992 is so recent you don't know. I left them and I
walked out.

	I went back to the attorneys in August. I was at a funeral in Brakpan
when I got a phone call from my niece. She said that I must come back
quickly because some people had got some compensation. Around the 20th of
August I went to the lawyer, I talked to Smith personally. Smith said
that there is no more money. He said that the money they had received
from the Defence Department was finished. He said, however, that he would
try. He took my details, my address and everything and told me that I
must wait. I am still waiting.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you very much. The Commission has noted where the
process is and we will stay in touch with you. I will hand you back to
the Chairperson.

MR POTGIETER: Thank you Hlengiwe. Thank you Mrs Chumgwa.

	----------------------













EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE









































