
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 2 - TUESDAY 6 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00414

VICTIM:				ROGER NEIL CHARLES

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		SHOT BY POLICE

TESTIMONY FROM:		ROGER NEIL CHARLES



ROGER NEIL CHARLES			Duly sworn states

COMMISSIONER: Dr Orr will assist you with your evidence, and I hand over
to her.

DR ORR: Hello Mr Charles, thank you for being here this afternoon I know
it hasn't been easy for you in terms of work commitments and so on, thank
you for taking the time to be with us.You going to tell us about an
incident which happened in October 1985 which was a time of turbulence
throughout South Africa and certainly the Western Cape wasn't spared.Can
you go ahead and tell us a little bit about yourself initially.How old
are you, where do you live, are you married. --- Yes I am married now I
live in Blue Downs and I work, I have three children.And I am 31 years
old, and that's basically it.

	Thank you, I see it's not only women who are embarrassed about revealing
their age.Can you go ahead and tell us what happened that evening on the
25th of October 1985. --- I was at work, we were working late, at the
time I was a salesman in Parow and we were working late because it was a
customers evening and after the customers evening I took my last customer
home and was on my home.I was married at the time as well and I was 20 at
the time, I got home just after eight.And I was involved in protest
actions at the time, but I was on my way back from work.I was in my car
it was past eight, as I said I was still at work at eight o'clock.I
parked my car and saw in the road where I lived I saw friends of mine who
were at school with me previously they were busy with activities in the
street, burning tires and so forth.I pulled up near them and scared them
a bit and then after that I proceeded home.When I got home my wife - my
ex-wife wasn't at home and of course I was worried because she was at
church which was just across the road from us, but she and my child had
to pass the barricades.I just put down my keys and went up to fetch my
ex-wife, but I had to pass my friends once again.I mean I knew them, I
had greeted them and everything, they then ran away, I thought they were
playing a trick on me but when I looked up again I looked straight into -
straight down the barrel of a gun.I turned around and ran and I felt
something and I knew I was shot.I still tried to carry on running but I
fell because I was afraid that they would shoot me again.I laid there and
after a while the ambulance arrived and the ambulance men bundled me very
roughly into the ambulance and I can still remember that these two white
officers - there are two stretchers in the ambulance which are fairly
soft, and they put me on the floor of the ambulance and they sat on these
soft stretchers.And we got to the hospital and I lost consciousness and
came to a while later to find myself under police guard.After a while in
the hospital I was discharged and was taken straight to prison.I appeared
in Court as well and because I don't know much about prison and things
like that I didn't know about it then and I still don't know much about
it now, but anyway, I appeared in Court and the trial proceeded for more
than a year but I was released on bail.At the end of the day - after
approximately a year in about 1986 I was found guilty, I was convicted
and sentenced to one year prison sentence which I didn't serve.But anyway
I was placed in jail with hardened criminals, and people who - of course
knew why they were there.And to me it was extremely traumatic because I
had never even seen the inside of a police cell, and I had to adapt for a
year living with these hardened criminals.But fortunately through God's
grace I survived, I got through it and after precisely a year in 1986 I
was sentenced on the 9th of December 1986 and on the 8th of December the
following year I was released.My daughter at that stage was two years
old, and unfortunately she still suffers - post traumatically because of
what I had experienced because my wife and I were estranged during my
incineration, and my daughter still suffers the post trauma of my
shooting and the effects of a split family.The person that shot me was a
Sergeant Esterhuizen and shortly after the shooting he became a Sergeant,
he wasn't a Sergeant at the time of the incident.And I think the other
one was Geduld although I am not 100% certain.

	Thank you Mr Charles, I just want to ask you a few questions about the
incident.You yourself were not participating in what was going on in the
street, you were just walking past to say hello to your friends. --- I
didn't specifically go and greet my friends, I was walking past there to
go and fetch my wife and my child.

	And in fact we have a statement from a Mr Andre Kenneth Jeftha who was
there that night, who confirms what you say that in fact you were not
participating in riots or unrest of any kind.Before you were shot, did
the police give youany warning? --- No there was no warning, or anything,
I just saw here this - I saw myself looking down the barrel of a gun and
that was that.

	And they shot you as you were running away. --- Ja agter my rug.

	In what part of your body were you injured? --- There were approximately
23 pellets in my back and the scars are still there and I know that there
are still some pellets in my body that weren't removed.

	And were you charged with public violence is that what you were
sentenced for. --- Yes I was charged with public violence.

	Thank you I have no further questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, any further questions?Thank you very
much I mean that you've taken the trouble to come and I keep saying much
the same sort of things as I respond to what I hear.Sort of the
randomness of some of the things that happened and people just being able
to abuse power and then having a judicial system that often was not was
it should be, a bastion against the erosion of liberty and freedom and
rights.I mean being anything but and then I mean you apart from all the
physical suffering and the emotional trauma that you've experienced
what's happened in your family, your child we keep always being amazed at
people being so human.I mean having gone through that experience you'd
expect that someone will be feeling very embittered, angry and hate
filled but the impression you give is of someone who is not so and we
give thanks to God for you and thank you for being who you are and for
helping in your way to contribute to making South Africa what it is today
and we can - we can have a Truth and Reconciliation Commission where you
can tell your story and can say well maybe we want to know why they did
it, who said they should do it and we hope that as a Commission we may be
able to supply those stories.But we want to say more importantly than
anything that you are helping to contribute to the healing of this
nation, a traumatized nation as you have contributed to it's liberation,
thank you.



























