TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - MONDAY 12 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00361

VICTIM:				JAN MOLOWITZ

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	SHOT BY KITSKONSTABELS

TESTIMONY BY:		JAN MOLOWITZ



MS BURTON:

Hello, Mr Molowitz. Can you hear me?

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes

MS BURTON:

Can you sit closer to the microphone so that we can hear you well,
please. Thank you. Before we start, could I ask you to stand and take the
oath.



JAN MOLOWITZ		Duly sworn states



MS BURTON:

Mr Molowitz, you have heard some of the stories that we’ve heard al ready
this morning and you are also going to tell us of your experience with
the kitskonstabels who was known to people as Spyker. Will you tell us
please what happened to you in July 1987.

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes, one the 11th of the 7th month 1987 my wife and I where on our way to
the location. I was taking my brother’s gas stove back to him, which I
had borrowed and my wife and I met up with five of these kitskonstabels
and they wanted to know what was in this bag which I was carrying.

And I told them that it was a gas stove which I was returning to my
brother - one which I had borrowed from him. My wife was slightly upset
and they started assaulting her and told me to leave. I left her behind
and went as far as my mother’s house at 377 in the old location and I
left the gas stove there. And proceeded on my way to a client who’s hair
I had to cut.

At this house on the corner, I found that they were busy beating this
man’s son - he was uncle Voorslag - and while we’re watching, one of the
constables, by the name of Vujani, wanted to know what I was doing there.

And I said:

No I’m just watching what you people are doing And I’m busy cutting
people’s hair.

He started assaulting me. And I put my hand in my back pocket and took
out the seizures which I used to cut hair and showed them to him. But he
continued beating me, but I said:

But you can see these seizures.

He stood back and I ran a slight distance and I stopped and said:

Look but you can’t take the law into your own hands. Take me to the
police station - lay a charge against me - so that I can see which
affiance I’ve committed.

And I heard a voice saying:

Shoot him, he is clever.

But I did not pay any attention to that and said to Vujani:

Come take me to the police station.

And I just heard a shot - I then fell. I had to push my intestines back
into my body and somebody came with a blanket and threw it over my body
and some more of these kitskonstabels came and one of them said:

Leave this dog, let him die.

And I nearly did die and said not one of them must go to him. Another
person, well know in the black area, went to call Phasi and Phasi came
and said to these ten kitskonstabels:

You can shoot me as well, but I’m not going to allow this man to die in
front of me.

There after the police van came followed by the ambulance. I then lost
consciousness and came too in Tygerberg hospital approximately a month
later. I did not know anything that was going on around me. I didn’t even
remember anything about myself. Upon my discharge from hospital, a
Warrant Officer Marks came to the hospital and said to me, yes, we do not
play, we just shoot you people.

I didn’t answer him.

During the month of December he came to my house and wanted to know if I
was going to lay a charge and I said: Yes, because I hadn’t done anything.

He then said that I should sign a letter. I signed it in my room and he
said that he was going to send a investigating officer to me to
investigate the matter further. Since December 1987 I haven’t heard
anything.

MS BURTON:

Thank you, Mr Molowitz. There is one thing I want to understand clearly.
When the kitskonstabels were beating up this man, and when they asked you
what you were doing, you showed them the seizures.

MR MOLOWITZ:

When he assaulted me, I said to him: I told you that I am cutting
people’s hair

And I used to cut some of their hair as well. I then took the seizures
out and showed them to him. And he continued beating me and I said to
him: You could see the seizures.

And he jumped back and then I ran. And then I ran a little distance,
stopped and I said to him: Take me to the police station and charge me so
that I can see what offense I have committed.

And I heard a voice say: Shoot him, he is clever

But I didn’t pay any attention to that. And continued speaking to him and
I just heard a shot and I was - I fell to the ground and had to push my
intestines back into my body.

MS BURTON:

When you showed him the seizures, you were using that as proof that you
were going to go and cut hair.

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes, it is seizures used for cutting hair

MS BURTON:

You were not using them to threaten him?

MOLOWITZ:

No.

MS BURTON:

The reason I’m asking you this, is that in the statement that you made to
us earlier - I think it’s a typing mistake - it says that you shoved it
to him. Not that you showed it to him.

MR MOLOWITZ:

I did not threaten him.

MS BURTON:

Thank you, Mr Molowitz, for clearing up the question about the seizures
and it was a pair of seizures, not a hair clippers? Is that right?

MR MOLOWITZ:

I did not use any clippers.

MS BURTON:

I think that we are not quite - I think I’m not making myself clear. I’m
not talking about klippe - stones - but a pair of hair clippers, like
they use in the barber shop.

MR MOLOWITZ:

It was an ordinary pair of seizures that also gets used at a barber shop
to cut hair.

MS BURTON:

Thank you, thank you very much. Now, since this happened to you - were
whose serious injuries - you have not been able to work?

MR MOLOWITZ:

No.

MS BURTON:

Are you receiving any disability grant ore a pension?

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes, I do get a grant at the moment.

MS BURTON:

And how is your health. Do you still have to get a lot of medical
attention?

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes, I have to go to the day hospital from time to time for treatment,
because I’ve been scared for the rest of my life.

MS BURTON:

And you still suffer a good deal of pain and although we’re glad to hear
that you’re receiving some medical treatment and some disability grant,
we’d like you to tell us how you are managing and if there is anything
more that you want to tell to the commission.



MR MOLOWITZ:

I am not happy because I cannot take care of my children like I used to.
And some of my children had to leave school without matriculation. Their
futures are also damaged because of my shooting incident.

MS BURTON:

Would you like to tell us a little bit more about your children. How many
you have and how old are they?

MR MOLOWITZ:

Two of them are married, two of them are still at school - Felicity and
Collin - and as it is, when - they are eighteen years old, I - they will
not be able to continue their studies because there wouldn’t be any
money. They wouldn’t get any money to continue their studies and the
money which I receive is also far to little - far less than what I used
to receive when I used to work.

MS BURTON:

Thank you. I don’t know if my colleges have any other questions.

CHAIRPERSON:

Any further questions?

ADV POTGIETER:

Mr Molowitz, you said that there was a Warrant Officer Marks that came to
you. And you signed something. What did he say to you, what was that you
were signing?

MR MOLOWITZ:

He asked me if I was going to lay a charge and I said: Yes, I would like
to lay a charge.

And he said to me that I should sign that form and that he would send the
investigating officers to me. Now investigating officer ever came to me
since 1987, up until now - 1996. Not one of them have since come to me.

ADV POTGIETER:

So, you understood this paper that you signed, to be that you were going
to lay a charge against the person who shot you.

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you ever make any inquiries about that later?

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes, I did attempt to make some inquiries. I went to Envy Esop and he
said that I should come again and phoned an attorney - I don’t know who
it was - but Marks obviously told them that I had assaulted a
kitskonstabel.

ADV POTGIETER:

So, you are saying that Mr Esop contacted a attorney?

MR MOLOWITZ:

Yes, I don’t know how far he got with that.

ADV POTGIETER:

But you personally never went to an attorney.

MR MOLOWITZ:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you never instituted a claim for the damage which you suffered?

MR MOLOWITZ:

No, not yet.

ADV POTGIETER:

No claims

MR MOLOWITZ:

No

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON:

Mr Molowitz, thank you very much. We, as the Commission, will try to see
what help we can offer to you. You’ve experienced something very terrible
and when one thinks of all the people who have been assaulted, injured
and so many of them are people that we don’t know anything about.

We don’t even know what happened to them. We appreciate people like
yourself who have come forward to come and give evidence here. And we
would like to be something which is going to go down in our history
books. Something about all the people who have been injured, who have
been killed, who have been assaulted, who have made a contribution to the
progress that we have made thus far.

We now have democracy, we have a democratically elected Government and
that is thanks to the contribution made by people such as yourself
because of the trauma which you have suffered and this has helped to
bring out democracy - make our democracy a reality.

We thank you and we would like to assure you that we will do our best to
see what relieve we can bring you. Thank you very much, thank you.



