
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 3 - WEDNESDAY 7 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00679

VICTIM:				DAVID DE BRUIN

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		SHOT AND KILLED BY POLICE

TESTIMONY FROM:		SARA MARTIN



CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I am glad to hear that, very welcome here today. You
are going to testify about an incident which took place in Elsies River,
we have already heard about the incident yesterday. Your evidence will
deal with Mr David de Bruin, his wife survived him but unfortunately she
is not in a position to be here. So you most welcome and thank you for
taking the trouble to come here today and to come and tell us what
happened and also to sketch the background for us. Before you start with
your evidence you must take a oath and I'd like you to stand so that I
can administer the oath.

SARA MARTIN				Duly sworn states

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, please sit down. Dr Wendy Orr will facilitate
your evidence and I hand over to her okay.

DR ORR: Thank you Chair and a very warm thank you to you Sara for being
here this afternoon to really represent the De Bruin family and to give
evidence about this incident. As Denzil Potgieter said we heard yesterday
from Mr Marius Hoffman who was shot in the same incident, shot and
injured and from Zane le Fleur who described the circumstances leading up
to and around this particular incident. I would also just like to say
that we do have a statement from Ms Moira de Bruin who is the late David
de Bruin's wife, but she is unable to be here this afternoon, so you are
here representing here and to give your own eyewitness account of what
happened that day. We know that leading up to this event in June 1992,
SANCO had asked to meet with the head of the Western Cape Regional
Services Council Mr Carpenter, he had canceled one meeting and the second
meeting had been scheduled for the 18th of June. Can you take up the
story from here and tell us what happened that evening. --- Yes, I am Ms
Sara Martin I am a divorced woman, I live in Elsies River [intervention]

	I am sorry to interrupt, could you actually move the microphone a bit
closer or perhaps your chair closer to the table thank you. --- I am Ms
Sara Martin, I live in Elsies River, I am divorced I have five children
and at the time of David de Bruin's shooting, I was the Chairperson of
SANCO, of the Elsies River branch. I will start with the Thursday on
which the incident happened, this was the second day that we were suppose
to have a meeting. There was a mass meeting and it was decided a mandate
was given to the executive of SANCO to go ahead with a march to the
Adriaanse Civic Centre. What happened that morning was that we all
gathered peacefully. And we went to the Adriaanse Civic to deliver our
list of demands to a Mr Carpenter he was expecting us, or we were
expecting him to be there. We arrived there and while we were trying to
let Mr Carpenter know that we arrived, some of the residence of Clarke
Estate, and from Epping Forest, these residence gathered there with us
and the reason for that, was that everybody at that stage was very
worried about their rent. Not only about the current rent we had to pay
but also about the evictions which were taking place at the time. The
people were very unhappy about the fact that these evictions took place
time and time again during winter when it was wet and cold, the families
were evicted in these circumstances. So we gathered there that morning
and we wanted to see Mr Carpenter. We were told that Mr Carpenter wasn't
prepared to speak to us, and that he was busy with something else and he
couldn't come and see us in Elsies River. You must understand Mr
Carpenter at that time, was not in Elsies River, he was at Wale Street
where he still is. And we said that we would not leave there that
morning, we insisted that we wanted to see Mr Carpenter, we wanted to
hand over our memorandum to him. This memorandum contained our demands.
We wanted to speak to him about the many-many problems which existed in
Elsies River and we as SANCO Elsies River were unable to give these
people any answers about their problems. Now we gathered in the entrance
hall and it was peaceful, we didn't disturb any of the clerks or the
officials there. The entrance hall is a big open space where the people
enter before going to the various desk to pay for their services. And
that morning to prevent people coming in to pay their rent and becoming
involved in our meeting with Carpenter, we as the leaders of SANCO asked
that the doors had to be closed and that only the SANCO people should
stay inside. We closed the doors, there were a lot of people inside,
there were woman with children, old people, there were lots of people.
And some of the people started singing, there was a bit of toi-toiing and
the leadership spoke to a Mr Packo and asked him where was Mr Carpenter,
he told them that the people were getting a bit tired of waiting, people
were anxious they wanted to see Mr Carpenter. Mr Packo told us that
Carpenter had notified him that he wasn't going to come and the people
then said that they would not leave until they could and speak to Mr
Carpenter. People stayed there and they toi-toied and the doors remained
shut. At about eleven o'clock that morning, this was the 18th of June
1992, around about eleven o'clock that morning we saw remand trucks
arriving and the police were arriving. We didn't take much notice of this
because I must say at that stage we were quite used to this. We thought
that we would just be caught, dragged out, put into the vans and taken
away. We had not idea that they would actually shoot at us this
particular morning, what we also weren't aware of, was that Mr Carpenter
had in the meantime told the security of the Regional Services Council -
had instructed them to come and see what was going on in Elsies River,
but we weren't aware of that. We just continued with our action because
we were adamant that we wanted Mr Carpenter to come and speak to us.
After a while we realized that more and more vans were arriving, but they
weren't the normal police vans, these were the blue one arriving, the
blue vans. And then realized that there was big trouble afoot. We asked
some of the comrades, of the men, to go and close the back doors, because
we sensed that there was big trouble coming and we also saw dogs in the
police vans. So the back doors were closed, we wanted to protect the
people inside. Because we were actually surrounded, so the doors at the
back were closed, what we didn't know then, and we subsequently found
out, was that they had keys to open that back doors. The next thing we
knew well some of the woman were still in the ladies toilets, and one of
the witnesses yesterday, he was one of the men waiting at the door, Le
Fleu, and he came rushing in and he said the people are busy opening the
doors at the back and they -they've got dogs. We tried to pacify the
people, try to calm them and told them not to panic, and just to stay
calm. What then happened was that some of the adults started panicking
and starting rushing around. And at that stage the people started
panicking, the doors burst open and men with dogs rushed inside. And they
simply released the dogs amongst the people and people started like
shouting and screaming and rushing this way and that and we decided the
doors, the front doors had to be opened immediately so that people could
actually rush out. The doors opened and people started rushing out.
Because at that stage police started hitting at people, they just moved
in amongst the people and started hitting out at them. It was chaotic,
dogs and people and policeman - you could just see rifles and guns and
one is naturally afraid if one sees a gun, especially in the context of
what was happening in the country at the time. At that stage no shots
were fired, people rushed out of the doors - I am sorry what I forgot to
say, two other witnesses should actually have been here today Ms Mathilda
Vantura should have been here and Ms Florence Witbooi should also have
been here today with me, and then also the deceased wife should have been
here, Ms Moira de Bruin. At that stage she wasn't there, she was at work,
but the other two witnesses were present. Now Ms Florence Witbooi and I,
we were amongst the last people to actually leave the hall with David de
Bruin. The reason for that was that I was the leader of the group and I
was responsible for their safety and I wanted to see them all safely out
of the hall. Florence Witbooi - when I turned around to look, I saw that
she was still in the hall and that she was trying to prevent a group of
policeman hitting David de Bruin. She was trying to prevent them from
assaulting him further and then I had to turn back, and stop them from
assaulting her, because they started hitting her as well. Everybody was
hitting David de Bruin over his body, his head, everywhere. And
eventually Florence and I moved to the door, why try to extricate David.
At that stage David had the Civic's flag with him, he held it out in
front of him whilst he was busy toi-toiing. Florence shouted that he
should leave the flag, he should drop it, but I don't think he heard her.
People were just milling about, some people ran to the left, others to
the right. The reason for that was that just in front of the doors, there
was a round construction almost like a sand pit. And when people started
running away, I looked over my shoulder and I saw that one of the adult
woman, she took off her slippers and she threw them at the door and at
that stage the security police and the normal police, they were inside
the hall, they were all inside the hall. And they closed the doors, we
were then outside and we ran. What then happened was somebody shouted
that they going to start shooting but before the shout ran out, another
woman turned around and she took a hand full of sand from the sand pit
and she threw that. And then one shouted that they going to start
shooting, we - we didn't actually realize that they would shoot, we
thought that it was just a threat to frighten us, but then we heard
shots. And at the time Marius who testified yesterday, he also came
running past, he was looking for his mother, because his mother had been
in the hall as well. That family had also received an eviction notice. So
the people would had run to the right hand side collided with Marius and
there were people lying on the ground and the next thing I saw, well I
brought photographs to illustrate the David de Bruin case, it's
impossible to show to the people now. But as he ran, well he actually
couldn't really run, because he was limping as a result of all the blows
he received and he ran up to a wall in the front of this hall and he
stood still to actually support himself because he couldn't continue. And
then the next volley of shots rang out and they all [indistinct] at him
and we just saw him slipping down against the wall and he shouted. But at
that stage I didn't know that, I just knew him - I knew he was one of the
people inside the hall and he was also involved in complaints about the
rent and so on - evictions, so he was an acquaintance, but I didn't
really know him. I shouted he is falling, Ms Vantura and myself and
Florence Witbooi a couple of us, we then ran back to go and see who it
was. When we got there, we saw it was him, I knew the deceased wife,
because we had worked together. And I then heard that it was David de
Bruin, that it was David de Bruin who had been shot. Ms Vantura picked
him up and spoke to him, but he didn't respond, he just lay on the
ground. And people came rushing back, somebody lifted up his shirt and we
saw that his whole chest was full of tiny little holes and also behind
his ears, behind his head full of holes. Ms Vantura held him in her arms,
somebody came and covered his body with something like a blanket, and I
walked away, I was totally shocked. I couldn't believe that we had
started out the morning peacefully and gathered and marched peacefully to
present our demands and to meet a particular person and that this could
lead to a person being shot dead. Now at that stage we didn't yet know
that he was dead, somebody ran to fetch help and we then realised that
somebody has also been shot, actually three people were shot and other
people were also injured, David de Bruin was fatally injured. So there
were other people injured as well and I think Chris Nissan was one of the
people who arrived, Dr Allan Boesak and so on, and they supported us.
That morning we went to see Carpenter but we didn't actually meet him, we
were totally devastated by this, I didn't really know what to do. Some of
the comrades really gave us direction, they supported us and helped us.
That Sunday there was a memorial service for David, and I was asked to
say a couple of words because I was the leader of the Civic organization.
I actually couldn't speak, I was drained of emotion, and I was overcome,
I just sat down and I wrote something about this incident and I have it
here with me if the Committee would allow me to read it, then I will do
that. And even now we still don't know, I have asked the deceased wife
whether she had heard anything, if she had heard from the pathologist who
did the post-mortem on David de Bruin to find out what the actual cause
of death was, was it a bullet wound or was it as a result of the blows to
the head. But as far as I am concerned, the blows to his head, that could
have caused multiple injuries, because when he came out of the hall, he
was no longer able to walk properly, he was limping and they then still
shot him. Yes that is my story and I'd like to read what I wrote.

	Yes go ahead and do that. --- Before I continue I'd just like to add
something, afterwards we negotiated with the Council and we asked that
the hall, the place where David actually died that it should be named
after David de Bruin, and that the hall should not be called the
Adriaanse Hall but the David de Bruin Hall, and that all the cases in
Elsies River and especially David de Bruin, that David de Bruin was the
first person to die as a result of any action taken by the Civic's in
Elsies River. We wanted some kind of monument to be erected to this
memory in the place where he died, there is space to actually do that.
And something else which I neglected to mention was that when the
newspapers, when the press came the next day, we were made out to be the
guilty parties, it was said that we had thrown stones at the police and
that was the reason why they had started shooting, that was not true. I
have a photograph in this little book of mine - a photograph of where
David de Bruin's body was lying up against the wall. There were no
stones, there was [indistinct] paving there and there wasn't even a tiny
little pebble which anybody could have picked up, but this is what we
read in the newspaper, the statement from the Regional Services
management statement that we had thrown stones. And that's why they had
to shoot, another demand which we made to Council concerned Moira de
Bruin, we wanted her to be able to not pay rent for the rest of her life,
that she receive free housing, that was one of our demands. Now can I
continue, I wrote this on the day of David de Bruin's memorial service
the Sunday before he was buried. What is in our hearts - it is in
Afrikaans, what was is in our hearts and minds the 18th of June is heavy
in our minds, it was a day of turbulence and storms. We stayed away from
our work, and went to the Council, we never would dream that the RSC
security would kill our comrades. Our demands was simply for Carpenter to
meet us, Carpenter didn't want to come, because he didn't care about the
residents. We decided we would stay there until Carpenter arrived, maybe
he did care after all, but to our shock we saw that the dogs were let
loose amongst us and three people were shot, David de Bruin died, but not
in vain. We support the family in their grief and loss, and we will never
forget David de Bruin. Marius Hoffman was maimed and he was still a
child. And then the question, what are we going to do about Carpenter and
his people, that was the question that all of us wanted to ask.

	Thank you very much Ms Martin, I have no further questions, but before I
close I am going to hand over to the Chair to see if any of my colleagues
would like to ask you anything.

CHAIRPERSON: Mary Burton.

MS BURTON: You mentioned that you had wanted to have a memorial in David
de Bruin's name, I'd like to know whether that has come about and also
that you had hoped that Ms de Bruin would be able to live rent free, I
don't know what the outcome of that was either. --- There were people -
well we divided people in certain committees to work on this issue of the
monument and we were involved in negotiations with the Council regarding
Ms De Bruin's home because her breadwinner had been taken away from her,
and there was nobody to support her, her husband had been taken away from
her, she had to pay rent, she had small children at the time and she had
no income, her income had just fallen away when her husband died. So I
recently spoke to her and she told me that she started paying rent again
and that the money which she hadn't paid previously she had to pay in
arrears. As far as the monument, memorial is concerned, there was another
committee they were looking into the memorial issue, and nothing came of
that.

	Do you - do you have ideas about what the Truth Commission could do in
this situation? --- Yes, well I don't know we feel that justice was not
done to Moira de Bruin we feel that she should be able to occupy her home
rent free, her case was referred to the lawyers in Athlone, I don't think
anything came of it. And she still hasn't heard nothing about this case,
she was called in many a time to go and do various things as in the case
of Marius Hoffman, but it was all to no avail, neither of them received
anything or heard anything more. If I may I'd like to say that David de
Bruin's case was such an unnecessary incident because we were actually
very stupid at the time, I can't say we are much cleverer now but still
with passing of the time we've actually learnt a lot. We now know what to
do and at the time we didn't actually know how to approach and who we
should apply pressure on in respect of our problems. Now we know who to
approach and to make our demands too. My expectation is and not only as
regards Elsies River but everywhere, because we don't only have this
problem in Elsies River, our problem is nationwide actually regarding
rent and this type of thing. The local Government must co-operate with
the Counselors and this group must work together with our communities to
prevent this type of thing happening, the kind of thing that happened in
1992, we must prevent it from happening ever again. Because at the time
nobody was prepared to listen to us, nobody wanted to lead our demands
and that was what lead to David de Bruin's death and we must sure that
there will never be a repetition of what happened in 1992 because I fear
that there might be a repetition of residence, because local Government
will not just disappear from the face of the earth, they will always be
there. And I hope what happened will be a lesson to the people at the top
to co-operate with the people lower down so that we can prevent
recurrence of this type of thing.

CHAIRPERSON: Wendy will you conclude.

MS ORR: I would just like to place on record that we have a number of
statements from various people including Ms Witbooi and Ms Vantura which
corroborate the evidence which Ms Martin has given today and as I said
the evidence which Zane le Fleur and Marius Hoffman gave yesterday, all
give the same version of events which is that it was a peaceful meeting
until the security forces barged into the hall. Thank you very much for
being here, it's very important that we hear from people like you about
these incidents and that we are reminded by you of ways in which perhaps
we can prevent this in the future. It must have been very distressing for
you as the Chairperson of an organization which was simply attempting to
hold a peaceful meeting to have seen the situation dissolve into such
horrific chaos in which people were injured and lost their lives. It just
remains for me to say thank you for being here, thank you for
representing the De Bruin family, thank you for representing your
community.

--- Okay.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much Wendy.



