	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - MONDAY 12 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00377

VICTIM:				EMILY MANONG [mother]

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	MOTHER’S BRUTAL KILLING

TESTIMONY FROM:		DANIEL MANONG



DR BORAINE:

Can you hear - can you hear me?

MR MANONG:

Ja.

DR BORAINE:

Good, welcome and thank you very much for coming, please will you stand
to take the oath.



DANIEL MANONG				Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you please be seated. Dr Ramashala is going to facilitate your
story.

DR RAMASHALA:

Mr Manong good morning.

MR MANONG:

Good morning doctor.

DR RAMASHALA:

How are you?



MR MANONG:

I am very well - I am fine.

DR RAMASHALA:

I am going to speak in English okay and during the proceedings I may stop
you from time to time to ask you questions that would clarify some things
that are not clear, is that all right with you?

MR MANONG:

It is good you can continue.

DR RAMASHALA:

First I'd like to read a statement from our research notes.

Victoria West, a small Karoo town almost on the south border of the
Northern Cape Province was site of intense protest led by youths in early
1985. Poor living conditions and high unemployment were characteristic of
the town for example many people lived in "Die Witblokke", stable like
structures housing entire families in one room with only a stable door
and one small window.

Hygienic standards were extremely low - unhygienic bucket toilets being
the main problem. The township was overcrowded. People could not leave
because of influx control and pass laws.

Die Noodkamp was an emergency scheme where people erected their own
shacks on serviced sites.

Protest was largely directed against the community council and municipal
police. Deep conflict at times escalating into violence developed between
collaborators and activist culminating in the mid 1985.

DR RAMASHALA:

It is within this context that Mr Daniel Manong will describe the
conditions which led up to the death of his mother. Mr Manong I would
like you to go back before 1985 and talk a little bit about what happened
in Victoria West that finally led to the death of your mother. As I said
I'll probably stop you from time to time to ask you some questions.
Please proceed.

MR MANONG:

May I start now.

DR RAMASHALA:

May I ask for a second for Mr Manong to introduce the lady sitting next
to him.

MR MANONG:

This is my wife.

DR RAMASHALA:

Okay, welcome Ms Manong.

MR MANONG:

If I think back, I think it was 1985, it was August the 27th it was on a
Saturday. The police were busy patrolling on that particular day, but
they fired tear gas off on that particular day. They shot into the air.
It wasn’t a ANC or UDF’s, they were - not only them - but people were
toi-toiing and my mother’s name was called out - Emily’s name was called
out.

	Now, after the police shot the tear gas - fired it - the gas covered the
entire town. And then they came to the house were my mother lived - a lot
of them came there. They came with lamp oil, and petrol bombs. And they
came and they broke the windows, they burnt , they tried to burnt the
house inside - people inside.

	I came there to come and inspect what was going on. I don’t live to far
from the house, but I was stopped by three people, I may call their names
if you would allow me:

	Don Jaftha

	Bhoeto Yoyo

	Xhani, Ellof.

	They came there and they covered by paraffin so I couldn’t continue and
I had to run to the Police Station. I wanted the police to come and see
what these youngsters where up to. And they where destroying things. They
charged the house and threw stones as it. People were inside hiding, so I
went to the police and the police said sorry we can’t do anything. The
people are to many. They wanted - friends then had to go and find other
police to try and help and they tried to get into the house - they broke
into the house - and threw God’s grace we could manage to get people out
eventually. And they could run away.

	The police managed in fact to calm things down up to the Sunday morning.
But Sunday people were still not very happy. My mother was taken away
half a kilometer out of the town. They’ve taken her to a camp where
soldiers use to come and visit. And were they stayed around. And later on
people said no my mother could come back. The old lady can come back,
nobody will fight with her. That’s what the youngsters said.

	So this all happened at 172 New Bright. She came back the 4th November,
it was on a Wednesday and they came to look for the old woman again.
Patrick came threw the window, opened the door and once again they threw
petrol bombs at the house and her burned her, my mother, for the second
time and this was more serious. When we came to the hospital I realized
she was not going to make it. The last words of her was she said that
this time they have me, but they have not broken my spirit. That’s what
she said. She died on the Saturday the 7th.

	That is actually what I can remember and how I can explain it.

DR RAMASHALA:

I’d like to ask you a few questions to help clarify some of the issues.
In the research statement there is mention of a Mr Enoch Manong who was a
councilor. What was the relationship between your mother and Mr Manong?

MR MANONG:

Enogh Manong was one of the committee members in the location, but my
mother was nothing. She was just an ordinary citizen.



DR RAMASHALA:

So this two was not related?

MR MANONG:

No, Enoch is my brother, he is my brothers child.

DR RAMASHALA:

Now you say that the people from Victoria West came after your mother,
and in your statement you said that they accused her of being a informer.
Am I correct?

MR MANONG:

What do you mean by that?

DR RAMASHALA:

I don’t know. It’s in your statement. It says informer - informer -
"epimpie" - "epimpie"

MR MANONG:

No, it’s not like that. Just before they toi-toied they were going house
to house. They where saying they’re going to fight with whites. They were
against it. That is when they decided to call them "epimpies". It’s
because they disagreed that they going to fight the whites.

DR RAMASHALA:

Thank you. You listed the people who burned down your mother’s house the
first time. I didn’t get all their names. The first one is Don Jaftha.

MR MANONG:

There were a lot of them. This happened in 54 Skima Location. The second
incident I have their names here. Just before she died, it was:

	Johannes Booysen

	Speto Ellof,

	William Faas

	Zwandile Vhula

	Patrick Faas

	Robin Booysen

	Stanley Vhula

	Mlamle Xhaxha

	Paulus Horn

	These are the names of the people who killed my mother - the people who
attacked my mother.

MS RAMASHALA:

This was in New Bright, was it in New Bright?

MR MANONG:

Correct.

MS RAMASHALA:

You also list a number of other people who where arrested in connection
to the accident. And I’ll just go over the list:

Stanley Vhula

Attie Kwela

Philimon Hocile

Boetie Motobeli

And of course others.

	Were these people involved in the burning of the house the second time?

MR MANONG:

I can say it was during the night. It’s only the police who reveille
their names after the police had investigated the incident.

MS RAMASHALA:

Your mother was then admitted to the Kempton Gedenk Hospital in Victoria
West. Is that true?

MR MANONG:

That’s correct.

MS RAMASHALA:

Do your remember the doctor who attended her?



MR MANONG:

The Dr Gazime Brakes passed away. Both doctors where there. They’re no
longer there - the other one passed away.

MS RAMASHALA:

Now, in your statement you also name - you say that there are a number of
people where staying with your mother at the time of the burning of the
house. Can you name those people and the relationship to your mother.

MR MANONG:

Yes, I can still remember them. The other ones:

	Bertie Manong

	Wiseman Manong

	Owen Nomava Nazuko

	Vernon.

	Those were the children who were there in the - that - house.

DR RAMASHALA:

Where are they now?

MR MANONG:

Since then they had to move to Cape Town, right now they are staying in
Khayelitsha.

DR RAMASHALA:

Mr Manong were you the only one in the family who stayed in Victoria West.

MR MANONG:

I am the only one who is still around. All - all of them they had to move
away, they had to leave the Victoria West.

DR RAMASHALA:

Let me - let me come to you Mr Manong and ask you how this accident or
the death of your mother, affected you in particular?

MR MANONG:

There is a great change in my life, everything was just - everything was
just destroyed because each time I bypass her grave, I just go there and
try to clean up the grave and I even ask my wife if we can move to
somewhere else, the wife always refuses, she say no we must look after
this grave of my mother. Even now we are still staying in that Victoria
West.

DR RAMASHALA:

What are you now doing Mr Manong, do you work?

MR MANONG:

I am unemployed at the moment, I am just working as a casual worker.

DR RAMASHALA:

Now you - what you say that the people I listed the second time around,
like Stanley Vhula were arrested but they were acquitted. Is that true?

MR MANONG:

That’s correct.

DR RAMASHALA:

Do you know where they are now - where is Stanley Vhula now?

MR MANONG:

He’s around he is staying in Victoria West.

DR RAMASHALA:

Attie Kwela?

MR MANONG:

And him, he is also around.

DR RAMASHALA:

Philemon Hocile?

MR MANONG:

Yes he is also around.

DR RAMASHALA:

Boetie Motobeli?

MR MANONG:

Yes he is also around.

DR RAMASHALA:

Was there any inquest?

MR MANONG:

The police took them to the courts, I don’t know what happened after
that, but they were taken to the court.

DR RAMASHALA:

Mr Manong now clearly this - the death of your mother affected you very
much. Could you tell us actually what happened to you emotionally and how
you are adjusting today?

MR MANONG:

To tell the truth I discovered that instead of going forward, I am going
backwards. I was drinking liquor at first, I was doing all the bad things
and I was moving in and out of jail. And then I decided to be born again.
When I became a born again, I could accept everything, even my wife also.

	Although I don’t have - I don’t hate them that much, it’s only God who
is going to judge them.

DR RAMASHALA:

Thank you very much Mr Manong, Chairperson I will yield and I may come
back a little later after my colleagues have asked some questions.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you any other questions - Joyce Seroke.

MS SEROKE:

Mr Manong I am happy that you are saying all this perpetrators, you don’t
hate them. And I would like to ask what efforts are you making to make
sure that there is reconciliation between the two parties?

MR MANONG:

You don’t think that you can meet and - or you can try to get some
assistance that your priest can try to - to talk to you, because they are
not [indistinct] that you reconcile them.

MR MANONG:

They do talk to me and I don’t have anything against them. If they are no
longer doing the bad things, but there are some of them - some of them
who say some of the things, but I don’t care much about those.

CHAIRPERSON:

Dr Ramashala?

DR RAMASHALA:

Mr Manong would you be interested in getting together with this people
you’ve listed to talk about the burning of your mother?

MR MANONG:

That would be very difficult, that would be very difficult, I prefer it
to be like it is right now.

DR RAMASHALA:

Is there anything else Mr Manong that you would like to tell the
Commission that we didn’t cover.

MR MANONG:

I want to give this paper to the Commission, I know that the Truth
Commission, these people are going to say that I’ve done this behind
their back, but I was just coming here so that I can refray??? in my
heart. If there is anyone who is against this, what else can I do if
maybe one of them is against this coming, the fact that I came here to
talk about this thing, what else should do?

DR RAMASHALA:

Mr Manong we would very much appreciate that article. We will make a copy
of it and we will return with the original to you. Thank you very much Mr
Manong.



