TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 3 - 24 APRIL 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00506

VICTIM:				NOMBULELO DELATO

VIOLATION:			HUMAN BURNING

TESTIMONIES FROM:	BUSISWE KEWANA [daughter]

					THOMZAMA MALITI



DR BORAINE:

Ms Kewana thank you very much for coming, I see you are - your really
know what to do, so let’s - let’s do it and start straight away before I
forget to ask you to take the oath.



BUSISWE KEWANA			Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Ms Kewana you are - come to tell a very grim - grim story and we’ve heard
some grim stories but this is perhaps one of the worst that we have
heard. The death of Nombulelo Delato, we want to thank you for coming, we
wait to hear your story and my colleague on the Commission, advocate
Denzil Potgieter is going to lead you and to assist you in telling your
own story. We welcome you.

MS KEWANA

Thank you.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Alex, good afternoon Busiswe.

MS KEWANA

Good afternoon Mr Denzil.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you for coming and thank you for being patient. Your - your
evidence - your evidence - can you hear me?

MS KEWANA

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

Okay, can you hear me now?

MS KEWANA

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

Or perhaps the translation.

MS KEWANA

Ja I hear you now.

ADV POTGIETER:

All right, you’ll hear if they translate.

MS KEWANA

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

We’ll try again, as the vice chairperson has indicated it - the matter
concerns your late mother which is Nombulelo Delato who died in 1985 in -
well the incident happened in Colesberg is that correct?

MS KEWANA

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Perhaps you could just give us some of your own - your personal
background, what do you do at the moment.

MS KEWANA

Okay, my name is Busiswe Kewana, I was born at Hanover here in the Cape.
I left it in 1984 and I went to study at Queenstown. That’s where I
studied and from there I came to Cape Town to study here.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much, when this incident happened that is here concerned
you were actually in Queenstown you were studying, you were at school is
that correct?

MS KEWANA

Yes that’s correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now what actually happened?

MS KEWANA

What happened while I was still in Queenstown, I received a telegram it
was from my grandmother in Cape Town. It was telling me that my mother
had passed away. He has been burnt.

ADV POTGIETER:

It’s okay, we know it’s very difficult.

MS KEWANA

After that, my grandmother and others tried by all means to find out what
happened. They went to Bloemfontein, to find out from that hospital where
she was, to find out what happened. Now there, they were told that she
has died. And she was burned while she was pregnant.

Now after that, we tried to make arrangements for the funeral. Now we
were prevented from burying her at Colesberg, I don’t know why - we were
never told. My mother and my maternal aunt - my mother - they were buried
by the Government in Bloemfontein, that’s all I heard.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now was there any indication given as to why this happened?

MS KEWANA

I tried to find out what happened, two weeks prior that I’ve - I met
another sister from Colesberg. After a long time when I have been trying
out what happened to my mother, she when she saw me, she recognised me.
She asked me aren’t you so and so’s daughter. I said yes I am.

I got curious and then I asked her, how do you know my mother, she
explained to me how she know - she knew her. So I told - I asked her what
happened to my mother for her to be burned like that in Colesberg, so she
told me what happened. I wasn’t satisfied, the reason why I am here, I
want the Commission to help me - to help me try and find out why they
killed my mother. Because to me this is a wound that will never heal.
That’s where I will end.

ADV POTGIETER:

Can I just ask you, you said that you were prevented from burying your
mother in Colesberg, why - why was that and who - who prevented you?

MS KEWANA

Like I said that we were not personally there we heard rumours that my
mother could not be buried there, we don’t know the reason, we were never
told, until today. Do you know whether your mother has been involved in
politics in any way?

ADV POTGIETER:

As far as I am concerned, my mother was - my mother was politically
active he use to attend meetings no but now still, I don’t understand why
that happened to her. The woman who told me this, she says they were
looking for somebody related to my mother. Now but because they couldn’t
find the person they were looking for then they took my mother and burnt
her.

	The people who were involved were they arrested, were they taken to
Court?

MS KEWANA

Yes according to what I heard they were arrested. But I don’t know what
that - the case - how the case ended.

ADV POTGIETER:

Okay is there - is there anything further that you want to add to what
you’ve said already?

MS KEWANA

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

Perhaps I should just mention that with you on the witness stand is your
grandmother.

MS KEWANA

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

That’s - is that Margaret.

MS KEWANA

Kewana.

ADV POTGIETER:

Kewana and with you as well is a witness, somebody who at least knows
what - what actually happened who was in Colesberg that’s Thomzama Maliti
is that correct?

MS KEWANA

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you, and you would like her to present her evidence as well.

MS KEWANA

Yes sir.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you, I’ll just hear if my colleagues have any questions for you
first of all.

CHAIRPERSON:

Any questions, Dr Boraine.

DR BORAINE:

Mr Chairperson I - I do have some questions, but I am wondering if it
wouldn’t be wiser to wait for the eyewitness or a witness because he may
answer the questions, and it will save some time if I - if I don’t ask
them now. But I’ll reserve that for later, but could I swear the witness
in.

MR POTGIETER:

Please.

DR BORAINE:

Ms Maliti can you hear me all right?

MS MALITI

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

You all right.

MS MALITI:

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

I have to ask you to take the oath like everybody else, so would you
please stand. I am going to ask you and then you can make your response.



THOMZAMMA MALITI		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much please be seated, Mr Potgieter.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Dr Boraine, perhaps I must just hear whether the translation is
coming through to you, you can perhaps just indicate, are they
translating for you, is it coming through there.

MR MALITI

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is it fine?

MR MALITI

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Okay, thank you very much. Thank you for coming, and of being of
assistance to the Commission. Is it correct that you were - you presently
living in Khayelitsha.

MR MALATI

Ja.

ADV POTGIETER:

But in 1985 you were living in Colesberg.

MR MALITI

Yes that is true.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you, and that you know the deceased that we talking about her.

MR MALITI

Yes I know him.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you know about the incident that this case is about.

MR MALITI

Yes I know.

ADV POTGIETER:

Can you still remember when it happened.

MR MALITI

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Can you give that date to us.

MR MALITI

It was the end of October - 10th of October 1985.

ADV POTGIETER:

Can you tell us what you saw what happened.

MR MALITI

He was on his way to work, to young men - young men approached at him.
Now they were five, when they saw him, they chased him. He went to hide
in another house, and now they took him out of that house.

They took him - they took his overall; and they poured him with petrol
bomb. One of them held his feet and then they started igniting her - his
- her feet. They were beating him up - her up.

INTERPRETER:

I am sorry I can’t hear the microphone is off. They beat her up and they
put a tire on him - on her. There was nobody who could stop this, the
police were looking for - for her but they were lost and they couldn’t
find her. She tried to go to them, when she got there, the people who
tried to hurt her and [indistinct] they couldn’t because she didn’t have
a voice, the police took her to Bloemfontein.

In Bloemfontein she stayed for three days, she started to mention
everybody who did this to her. Then after that, she died. They didn’t
allow her to be buried in Colesberg, because they said she was an
informer. After - they said if she was buried there, they were going to
burn the church. Then she ended up being buried in Pilonome Hospital,
that’s where I will stop for a moment.

ADV POTGIETER:

I assume that this incident had taken place in the township in Colesberg.

MR MALITI

Sorry?

ADV POTGIETER:

I assume that the incident happened in the township in Colesberg.

MR MALITI

In the location.

ADV POTGIETER:

In the location?

MR MALITI

Yes it was [indistinct]

ADV POTGIETER:

Now was the deceased involved in any politics, supporting any movement?

MR MALITI

Yes he was in every meeting that was held, she never missed any.

ADV POTGIETER:

In those days there was the UDF, the United Democratic Front.

MR MALITI

Yes it was the UDF.

ADV POTGIETER:

She supported that movement?

MR MALITI

Sorry.

ADV POTGIETER:

She was supporting that movement.

MR MALITI

Yes she use to attend UDF meetings every day.

ADV POTGIETER:

You - I assume you knew the deceased well.

MR MALITI

No I can’t hear well no.

ADV POTGIETER:

I will just repeat that - I’ll repeat the question just see if it’s
coming through to you. I accept that you knew Ms Delato well.

MR MALITI

Yes I knew her well.

ADV POTGIETER:

Ja, was there - was there any truth in this allegation that she was an
impiempi an informer?

MR MALITI

She is my cousin, my uncle who was a policeman was looking for her, they
said if they can’t get part of her family, they are going to get her
then. That’s they got her, now but the reason why they burn her is
because my uncle is a policeman.

ADV POTGIETER:

And the people responsible, who are they - I mean - what - where do they
belong in the - in the situation in the location at that stage, were they
comrades - what were they - were they [intervention]

MR MALITI

When they - what they called themselves was that they were comrades.

ADV POTGIETER:

You say that their names were given to the police, do you know what
happened further?

MR MALITI

Yes they were arrested in 1985 and they were sent to Middelburg Cape.
Then after that they were arrested. I am sure they got out of the prison
after Mandela was released from prison, then they were also released. One
of them was going to be hanged, I don’t know what saved him, his name is
Tifo Sihlaba.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much, I’ve got no further questions.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you - are there any further questions, Dumisa Ntsebeza.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is your name Thomzama?

MR MALITI

Yes my name is Thomzama.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

There are just a few things that I would like us to explain, you said
while this happened there was a boycott of the shops that time. One of
the names stood up we were told now that we should boycott all the shops,
a consumer boycott. Your mother’s main offence was that she went to buy
meat from the butchery, is there anything else? --- No there is nothing
else is just end of Tape 15, side B …

ADV NTSEBEZA:

You will correct me if I am wrong, she tried to clear her name.

MR MALITI

Yes sir.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

According to the report that you gave us earlier, the people who were
taking the statements earlier of the Commission. She paid in

R100-00.

MR MALITI

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Where did she send this R100-00?

MR MALITI

She send it to the comrades and the comrades announced it that she did
pay this R100-00 trying to ask for forgiveness for buying meat during a
consumer boycott, they said they forgive her. At that time she was
staying in town, not in the township. Now she took this letter to the
township.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

In other words she wrote a letter, saying that is asking for forgiveness
for what she has done, and she would like to come back to live in the
township, but - and she was told that - yes she has been forgiven by the
comrades and again this was announced in the meeting. It was announced
that yes she was forgiven?

MR MALITI

Yes this was so.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When she came back to the township she was under the impression that she
was forgiven.

MR MALITI

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

In other words her killing - she was killed while she was still under the
impression that she was safe, knowing that she was forgiven.

MR MALITI

Yes that’s so.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When did the police come in?

MR MALITI

The police arrived when she was burnt already.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What do you mean now by that?







MR MALITI

When the police came in, they could - they were trying to find out where
she was, but they could hear her crying. They saw her in the Main Road,
she was already alight.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Did she run after she was burnt?

MR MALITI

No she couldn’t run, she was just walking slowly, her clothes were
burning. She went to the direction where the police were.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Was she walking around while she was naked?

MR MALITI

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Were the people afraid to help her?

MR MALITI

No-one was allowed by the comrades to help her, so she went alone to the
van.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Where these comrades who were chasing people away, where were these
people at this time?







MR MALITI

There were five of them, at the beginning there were too many but at the
end they were just five, one of them was Tifo Sihlaba, it was Tabo Gusha,
Pinkdyaan Kelem, Toto Mayaba, Tembile Falati.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What about Zolile Silwayane?

MR MALITI

Zolile Silwayane is the one who actually accepted the money, he is the
leader of this whole situation.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

I just wanted to clarify that. So Zolile is the one who accepted the
money?

MR MALITI

Yes he is the one who - he is the one who announced that she has - he had
received the money and that he was the one who actually went back again
and said she must be ignited.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now this policeman Fezile Malitiba - Maliti is he your uncle?

MR MALITI

Yes she is my uncle and the deceased uncle. We are [indistinct] to him.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

So you are related to Fezile?



MR MALITI

Yes, my mother is Fezile’s brother.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Who is Fezile now?

MR MALITI

Fezile is the policeman - Fezile Maliti is his name. He was wanted
because he was a policeman, but because he was staying in town the
comrades couldn’t get him. The actual person who they wanted was Fezile,
now the comrades.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

So the comrades decided to take - to take Fezile’s relative.

MR MALITI

First they came to me, then they went to my - to the deceased.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What was your offence?

MR MALITI

Our offence was because we were related to this policeman - Fezile our
uncle. I ran to Cape Town.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

We understand Thomzama that this is very painful, could you please and
endure until I finished asking questions. These questions will enable us
to finish this report.

This - this is a very unique case from all the cases we have heard, we’ve
been listening to cases where our people were being killed by police and
the Government but now this is unique because our people now are being
killed by our own people at the same time. But now we are forced now to
try and get all the details about this, so that in the report that we
make, the Chairman of this Commission can be able to bring out the
foolishness of these murders just by suspicion - just a few questions
then I will let you go. Do you know the husband to the deceased?

MR MALITI

Yes I know his name is Doti. That day - he doesn’t know anything because
he ran. He ran to Crossroads, and even today he is not well since then.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Just to clear something up, are you trying to say he was never well again
mentally?

MR MALITI

Yes that’s what I am saying.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Do you know what happened to him?

MR MALITI

He is now at Vredestad and he want’s to come back to his house. But he is
still struggling to get it back, he is the Mayor.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is there anyone among you who can still go back to Colesberg?



MR MALITI

No I don’t want anything to do with Colesberg.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

I heard that one of your wishes was that you would like to have her bones
back.

MR MALITI

Yes we would like them to come back to Colesberg.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Among these people who are now out of jail, are they here?

MR MALITI

Yes they are all out of jail.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Do they still feel that Busisiwe’s mother was an informer just because he
went to buy meat?

MR MALITI

No I can’t hear - I can’t - I didn’t hear anything about that, I don’t
know if that’s how they still feel. Nobody even bothered to ask for
forgiveness. When we saw each other, they just looked down.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

I am very sorry that we have to ask you these painful questions, but I am
sure that you also understand that we have a duty here to perform, thank
you very much.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you, anyone with a question, Mary Burton.

MS BURTON:

Just one question, [indistinct] whether Fezile Maliti has - is still in
Colesberg?

MS KEWANA

[No audible answer]

MS BURTON:

Can I ask the question again, I just wanted to ask whether your uncle
Fezile Maliti is in Colesberg, whether he returned to Colesberg or where
he is now.

MS KEWANA

He was still - he was in Colesberg, he just came last year and he says he
is not going anywhere.

MS BURTON:

Thank you and may I ask another question. You - as I understand your
statement there were a number of possible reasons why there was this
attack on your mother, because she had bought things from the shop
although she had tried to make up for that, all because these were
suspicions that she was a an informer and also because she was related to
a policeman.

MS KEWANA

Yes that is so.

MS BURTON:

And at the same time you - there seems to be a suggestion that there were
somebody pushing them to do this, that it wasn’t just any of those
reasons only, but that there was also some pressure on those people to
take this action.

MS KEWANA

Yes that’s so.

MS BURTON:

And you [indistinct] in your statement that those people were on the one
hand working for the organisation but on the other hand also working for
the police.

MS KEWANA

Yes that’s correct.

MS BURTON:

That’s also something you would want us to try and find out more about.

MS KEWANA

[No audible answer]

MS BURTON:

Shall I say it again, so you would like us also to try and find out more
about that so we can understand better.

MS KEWANA

Yes I would be very happy if you can do that. I would be happy if she
would be buried again in Colesberg and then she would again get her own
house.

MS BURTON:

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you very much - it’s obvious to us that the things that we have to
investigate - it’s just ugly things and it’s not just from one side only
it’s from both sides, this is why this Commission is an independent
Commission. It is not only pulled by one side - it is meant to
investigate all these atrocities that had happened in this country.

We are promising you that we will investigate up to the roots of this
whole matter. Then we will be able to tell you why this happened maybe
then we can be able to help you and try and bring your mother’s bones
back to Colesberg, thank you.

MS KEWANA

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

You may now leave.

MS KEWANA

No I haven’t finished. As she has said before, my - the question that I
expected from you is that we are going to ask me what do I expect from
the TRC.

My wish from the Commission is that my mother would be buried where she
was born, and I would like us to get the house back, our own house back.
I couldn’t finish my studies because nobody could give me money, now I
had to work so that I can educate myself. If I could just get something
to help my family I will be happy with that.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you, we don’t really promise that we are going to do all these
things, but we will try, thank you.













	







