TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - 24 JUNE 1996



CASE NO:			CT/00547

VICTIM:			NATION NKOSANE BAHUME		

VIOLATION:		 SHOT DEAD BY POLICE

TESTIMONY BY:	MARIA BAHUME



DR ORR:

Thank you Chair. I have a few housekeeping announcements to make as we
call them. Firstly to explain the use of these translation devices to
you. Unfortunately we don’t have enough of these to go on to every single
chair so I would ask you to share, particularly if you do understand the
language which is being used by the witness - if you could give your
headset to someone who does not understand that there are a fair number
of these available in the hall.

The headphones plug into the receiver at the back and there are two
buttons on either side. One with numbers on - those - that button is to
choose the language which you want to hear. Number 1 is Afrikaans, Number
2 is English and Number 3 is Xhosa so you can choose the language you
would like to be hearing and then there is a volume button on the other
side which you can make louder or softer.

The piece of apparatus which actually transmits the sound are these two
black boxes up here so you need to make sure that the front of your
device with the glass bubbles on it is pointing to those black boxes
otherwise your reception will be very poor.

Please at lunch time and teatime leave these devices on your chair, do
not take them away with you. We need to recharge them so they must stay
behind.

Secondly for everyone who has cell phones, could you please turn them off
and that includes people on the panel.

We ask you to stay seated whilst witnesses are testifying. It is very
disruptive if people are walking in and out. Obviously if someone arrives
and wants to come in we will allow that but please don’t get up and walk
around whilst the witnesses are testifying.

If anyone here today would like to make a statement to the Truth
Commission, we do have facilities for taking your statements and you
should talk to one of the two gentlemen at the back of the hall, Kelvin
and Sekebo and they will make an arrangement for your statement to be
taken.

Finally the programme has omitted to put down morning tea which will be
at about 10h30, so we are not going to be sitting here all the way
through till lunch time, there will be a break at 10:30. Also I am sure
you have noticed this, on the last day it says Thursday the 26th of June,
the last day is Wednesday, 26th June, thank you Chair.

DR BORAINE:

We call the first witness - Maria Bahume and we invite her to come to the
witness stand.

DR ORR:

Ms Bahume, can you hear me?

MS BAHUME:

Yes.

DR ORR:

Would you stand to take the oath please.



MARIA BAHUME				Duly sworn states



DR ORR:

Thank you, you may sit down. I am now going to ask Ms Pumla Gobodo to
help you to tell your story to us.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

I greet you Ms Maria. We have started this a long time ago. We are
opening wounds that were healed a long time ago. When we met as women
congress you told us it was very difficult for the past two weeks.

We do understand that it is like that, but the wound can’t be healed
without disturbing it again. So we thank you for your to come forward. I
will start by giving a brief - I will just give a brief description of
what happened during those days when Nation passed away and what was the
cause of his death. Nation is the son of Maria Bahume. That’s the name he
was known of, he was the SRC leader. He had a high portfolio in this
organisation. He was shot - that was on the 16th August, 1985. He was
shot by policemen known as Security Police.

Ms Bahume will give us the whole story but I want her to give you a - I
want her to tell you how the situation was in Worcester - Zwelethemba
Location.

Perhaps another important thing about Zwelethemba is its very far from
Worcester. People from Zwelethemba they think it’s another town,
separated from Worcester, that’s how our location were built. Things
started to be difficult between Zwelethemba and Worcester and our
location amongst the Coloureds and blacks there started to be difficulty
in 1983. We had the build up.

In the whole South Africa things were happening because our students had
their organisations there was COSAS - one of those organisation, there
was a very funny feeling during the location - people were emotional. I
would say amongst the blacks and the Coloureds - they were all working
together, there was no - they were co-operated there was nothing that you
can’t even differentiate that this is the organisation of the blacks and
the other ones for the Coloureds.

That’s what we noticed by the time we arrived here in Worcester. The way
youth and the adults in the community were fighting against the police.
Blacks and Coloureds were in co-operation - good co-operation working
together.

I will just be brief, during 1983 we know that UDF was being established
in South Africa. It started here in Worcester in August 1986 but there
was women’s organisations - one of them was United Women’s Organisation.
There was another one for the community known as Worcester Civic
Communities Association. That was the one who had to look amongst the
community’s interests. During that time the Government of - the apartheid
Government had already decided and thought about the community
councillors. They wanted to deploy them throughout the location, that’s
where the trouble started and where the misunderstanding started, because
the community couldn’t accept the community councillors.

And then the Worcester Civic Association decided to go to the Regional
Administration Board to go and complain telling them that the community
councillors are not welcome into the community, that’s where the problem
started because policemen wanted and forced the community councillors to
be in the locations.

That’s where the women’s organisation from Worcester decided and they
were united as black women from the black community and on the other side
from the Coloured Community. Women get together, go to Cape Town to meet
the people from the Black Sash.

We’ve met those people during the past week. Di Bishop, Mary Burton were
one of them. They came here to Worcester, they’ve started an advisory
office here in Worcester. They were trying to help people, they wanted to
have negotiations that people must not be humiliated. Policemen started
the violence in the Worcester Civic Association - between the Worcester
Civic Association and the Councillors and the people who are enforcing
the law. People were arrested in big masses. During 1983 they were
detained, put in jail, that’s where the advise office came in that was
started by the Black Sash.

Ever since then there was no rest, there were always fights between -
amongst the policemen and the community and the councillors were forced
to resign at the end of 1983 so they did. But it didn’t end there because
the law enforcers they forced the community councillors to be amongst the
community - students and the community were against that aim.

There were meetings children couldn’t attend the school - they also
organised their meeting, it was just a messed up situation - policemen
against the community. Ever since then from June 1985 while the people
like Goniwe - people were chasing after Goniwe - the whole South Africa
was emotional, even here in Worcester there was that emotion.

And then after that the community of Worcester they went to the Regional
Security Board demanding that we don’t want the community councillors in
own location. So we don’t like the rent fees and the electric fees to be
increased because - so the Worcester Civic Ass attended that and the
policemen will get into masses in the location with big vans and hippos -
those big vans known as hippos and people were arrested. Some of them had
too march to protest against the arrest of the people.

And then in July the students decided not to go to school for the whole
week. To stay away and they had to look at this matter. Nation, the son
of Ms Maria, was one of those students who were leading the youth and
they tried to convince the other youth that they must discuss and
negotiate about the policemen who were fully involved in the community.
And they tried to make their meetings in Ms Maria’s house - it’s when the
policemen tried to disturb the school boycotts they were chasing students.

At that time there was no-one that got shot, although there were shots -
they would just get injured - no-one was shot dead then. And then in
August, it’s when Nation was the first victim in the whole of Worcester
to be shot dead by the policemen. Those who were called security
policemen.

So Nation Nkosane was the first victim. And then after that women marched
to the police station who blocked the whole of Zwelethemba surrounding
the whole of Zwelethemba there was only one entrance in Zwelethemba.
That’s how our location have been built - locations have been built all
over South Africa.

When they were looking for someone they knew there was only one entrance,
one exit then the women marched protesting against the policemen amongst
the community, they didn’t want them inside.

There were so many policemen that people thought they were going to kill
us as a whole in the Zwelethemba community. We were so afraid of that. So
we will call upon Ms Maria to tell us firstly about Nation. How was he
convinced and got involved in the SRC. How fully was he involved in that
organisation?

MS BAHUME:

Nation was always amongst the people who were attending meetings and I
used to prevent him to do so because I was always afraid that his life
would be at stake. He tried to listen to me and the meetings continued to
be held. He used to go together with his colleagues and they would keep
on going and this took a long time until he died.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Mama, do you still remember the portfolio he held in the Students
Representative Council?

MS BAHUME:

I would say he was holding a very high portfolio.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you briefly explain what happened on the day when he died. Please
start when the day when he - before he went out.





MS BAHUME:

I - on the day concerned I requested that he make breakfast for us. His
friends were waiting for him. I didn’t imagine that he would be going
along with them. I thought that they would be staying in my place and
then he told me that the following day at 3:00 am he would like me to
wake him - at 3:00 am [intervention]

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

We know we are trying to evoke feelings of pain to you.

MS BAHUME:

When I went to wake him I knocked at his door, there was no response. I
opened the door forcefully, I could see that the bed was still the same
way it was the previous day. It was clear that he didn’t sleep that
night. I was surprised because I didn’t know that he was away.

I went back to the house, I sent Jerry his brother to go and check her at
Nompulelo’s place. Nompulelo use to ask him to drive him to Worcester.
Jerry went and then he found that there was nobody and the bakkie in
which they used to go - travel together was not there. And I had a hope
that maybe my son was still with him or with her.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

If you say he was in a separate room and when you talk about ]indistinct]
what do you mean - do you mean a back room. We would like you to explain
so that the people have a clear picture.

MS BAHUME:

I have a two-roomed house, it is a kitchen and a bedroom so at the
backyard I built another one so that as my children as they grow up, they
should occupy that one - the back rooms.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Mamma when you went out to open the door you didn’t think that maybe you
wouldn’t find him. You thought that you would find him on the bed.

MS BAHUME:

Yes - I heard gunshots. It was a usual situation that there were always
gun shots on the - in the vicinity. I didn’t think anything because it
was a very usual situation where you’d hear gunshots.

When I saw him I didn’t even - when I saw that he was not in the room I
just thought it was one of those things. I had never imagined that my
child could die out of the gunshots because nobody had ever died before.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Could you please explain and state what you mean by saying there were
always gunshots but nobody ever died.

MS BAHUME:

I do not know because you would hear gunshots all the time. Tear gas were
always thrown to the people. At times they would also shoot at a child’s
pozzi - the back rooms that’s what I mean and then you’d see that there
was a canister which was thrown in the room. So I didn’t know what it was
when I heard the sounds, it was gun or it was the tear gas canisters.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

In other words you are trying to tell us that there were always threats
or any ways of showing that anything could happen.

MS BAHUME:

Yes, that is why I was always inside because I was always afraid of my
life. It was a very stressful situation.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So is that why you said Nation shouldn’t go out.

MS BAHUME:

Yes. I informed him that there are people sometimes who die, he must
always be careful. They should protect each other and they should avoid
going out at night because it was usually at night when you would hear a
lot of gunshots.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

If you say there were people there who were doing who [intervention]

MS BAHUME:

No I was referring to other places it has never happened here in
Worcester.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So do you believe that the people were also afraid?



MS BAHUME:

Yes we were all afraid, we were fearing for our children’s lives. We knew
that - the little ones should always be kept inside indoors. Because the
police were patrolling the place all the time and we were always trying
to see that our children were protected. But the older ones we could not
do anything about.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So it seems as though it was a very terrible situation where your life
would always be threatened.

MS BAHUME:

You wouldn’t even go to the shops or the cafÉ because when you meet the
police they would just insult you for no apparent reason and then they
would always say - we are going to shoot you dead.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So in your area were you always tortured emotionally?

MS BAHUME:

Yes, we even stopped putting lights on because we were afraid to attract
the police.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So were you always afraid to be in your place?

MS BAHUME

Yes, it was a threatening situation all the time.





MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Okay lets go back to the incident where you said Nation left the place.

MS BAHUME:

Yes I always sent Jerry to go around and looking from the friends places
and his friends used to come and always ask where was him. I will always
informed them that I do not know where he is but I was having a hope that
he was with Nompulelo because it was said the bakkie was not at
Nompulelo’s place. Because he used to drive him around - to drive her
around. I had hoped that he was together with her.

There was a - my next-door neighbour’s - neighbour had died so I was
preparing to attend the funeral and Jerry was also going to the funeral.
So we went to the funeral without Nkosane who is Nation. When we came
back, one of the women who was next to me [intervention]

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

We can understand why you are so emotional and this touches us also. It
is not an easy matter to loose your son in such a manner, we know it was
very painful - it was a painful experience for most of the people.

MS BAHUME:

This woman asked me - he asked me whether I know if that there was
somebody’s son who was shot dead the previous night. I said no, I didn’t
know anything. I asked her is there anybody who was shot dead - he said
yes there was somebody who was shot dead. He mentioned the area and said
it was just next to me - in the opened veld next to me and he said there
were a lot of vans - there were a lot of vans moving around the previous
night. I just that I had heard the gunshot and took it as just one of
those things because it was a situation which was very familiar to us.

So I went out and met my eldest son. I informed Marshall about what I
heard that somebody was shot dead and we started to panic because we knew
that Nkosane never came back. And then Marshall told me that he would be
coming [intervention]

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Is Marshall your son?

MS BAHUME:

Yes, Marshall is one of my sons. I went to one of my friends and informed
him of what had happened and then he confirmed - he also confirmed that
and said it was a person who was estimated to be about 20 years old.

I informed him that my child didn’t sleep at my place so we do not know
his whereabouts. So I went back to my place and I saw the people - the
people were coming to converse with me and I didn’t think - I really
didn’t think. And then Marshall came along. I still didn’t think that
something had happened to my child. They just stated that they were going
to the hospital and mortuary to make enquiries and they - my child’s
colleagues came in and they always just come to find out if my son hasn’t
come back.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Which children are you talking about?

MS BAHUME:

The others who were working with him as committee members of the student
representative council. Whilst I was still sitting at my place one
gentleman came into my house. He didn’t even say anything also he just
communicated with me just normally.

After a few minutes Marshall and Fizele and my husband they came again -
Marshall was in tears. She was coming along with my husband and my
in-laws. I could estimate that something terrible has happened and I also
thought it was nothing else but my son who might be dead. I could think
that it might have been him who had been shot the previous night.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

We know that we have evoked some pain and we can understand how - why you
can be like this. We quite understand that is very difficult for a person
to have forgotten everything about what happened but now if he - this you
have to [indistinct] and [indistinct] what happened then it becomes such
a terrible situation we quite understand.

MS BAHUME:

The people who came to my house informed me that my son had been shot
dead by the police. I just accepted that but I had a question. It was
quite a long time after he died and asked why should God let me be the
first one to experience such a painful situation.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

I think we should let her cry, probably it is a way that would relieve
her. I know that she has been bottling this for a long time. At times it
is very important to let somebody to ventilate - he can actually and
let’s allow her to express her pain in whatever manner that she feels is
proper for her. We quite understand what is happening presently. We know
that we are opening healed wounds.

It is one of the reasons why we are meeting here today. We want to remind
ourselves about all the pain we experienced so that we can heal and we
should know the truth of what happened during those periods because some
of the people have already forgotten or completely forgotten about this
and others don’t even know that it ever happened. We know that we have
suffered a lot and we quite understand what is happening now.

MS BAHUME:

After my son died the police kept on coming to my place. One day there
were people who came to my place. I don’t know whether they were
photographers of whoever. I was confined in bed and then the people came
and asked my son - my eldest son Marshall to say whatever he thinks about
what happened. And then he did talk to these people. We never rested
because we were always harassed by the police.

One day Miriam, was sleeping at my place.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Who is Miriam?

MS BAHUME:

She is the lady who is just next to me. The police came in and they all
asked us one by one who we were. We had to inform them about our names,
we were told to wake up. Some of the police came in and went to the
children’s rooms and then the others came to my room. We had to explain
who we were. We did as they wanted.

I can remember when Miriam was asked she mistakenly said she is Mildred.
One of the policemen called her, she was ordered to go along with the
police. When she was going out, she said to me - please phone my place
inform them that I had been taken by the police. When the police learned
that he was communicating telephonically with someone else they
disconnected the phone and broke the wires and then they took Miriam away.

Thereafter they continued coming all the time asking for Marshall. When
Marshall was asked what his name was he said he would Vuyisili and he
would deny that he is Marshall. And this continued for quite a long time
until the day of the funeral.

And we could see that some of them were high ranking officials from the
police and they would come with documents - they gave us restrictions and
telling us what type of funeral arrangements we should do. They
stipulated the number of people who were supposed to attend the funeral,
they also informed us that when the day which is - the child supposed to
be buried should be a day during the week.

I said it would be difficult to say we should stipulate the number
because this was a student and he was very popular. There would be
neighbours who would be attending and some of the schoolchildren would be
coming along. So they said it would be all right then to allow as many
people as possible but they didn’t want any demonstration, they didn’t
want any placards, nothing out of order should take place.

And then on the day of the funeral we went to the minister of religion
and then the police also went to the minister and stated that the
minister who will be leading the procession should use a certain street
which is extremely out of the location. And then when the minister was
doing as he was ordered by the police, the people were surprised because
they thought he had lost his way. And then he had to explain to the
people that no, this was the order from the police and he didn’t want any
chaos to take place. So that is why he was obeying the orders.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Could you please explain what happened as the police have given
restrictions and orders about the way in which the funeral had to be
conducted? Can you explain what was happening at the hall or at the place
where you were holding the sermon? Could you please explain what happened
when the minister went there.

MS BAHUME:

A night before during the ritual, I was informed that there were a lot of
police outside.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Do you mean the day before the funeral?

MS BAHUME:

Yes very early in the morning every street was cordoned by the police
vans. All the streets and the one which was just next to my place was
also cordoned by the police. There were vans, the big hippos and the
police were armed. They were pointing their guns at our range - directly
at us.

They used also another street so that there should be a blockade so that
nobody comes to the street where there is a funeral. The others were just
beyond the main road and they were just guarding the procession and how
it was going to be conducted.

When we got to the hall or the venue, the Minister was still holding the
sermon and during that period the police came nearer. We could see that a
lot of them were coming nearer the hall. We could realise that something
terrible was going to happen. Whilst we were still listening to the
sermon there was a hailer and there was an announcement through the
hailer that we should come out of the hall.

We were ordered to disperse and the minister said also we must abide by
the rules because this is what the police had said and they had even
stipulated the time.

When one of the neighbours who was also on the other side of the room and
then he also - when he came nearer he was prevented by the police to be
part of the funeral. When we were taking the - the coffin was taken and
put on the hearse and there were gunshots again. Some people ran away and
jumped through the windows. There were stampede - others were jumping
over the fences and most of the people now wanted to go back home because
they were afraid that it was going to be a massacre should they followed
the procession.

So most of the people disbanded and ran away. One of the men said he said
he saw one woman who was lying on the ground. We continued - we couldn’t
do anything because we were afraid so we just went along and continued
the procession. We were now few and there were a lot of police.

There is another road which was corrugated and it was also the road which
we were ordered to use. So we were escorted by the vans and the police to
the graveyard. During this period when we reached the destination there
were already people who were already loaded in the van and they were
claimed to have been arrested. We were all panicking and we did the work
so quickly because we were afraid that there might be something terrible
again and then we rushed up back to my place.

We learned that there was one child who was shot during the period when
there was that stampede. Apparently this happened when they were trying
to get out and it was reported that the child died. I was afraid.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

I would like you to go back to the period when Nation was shot dead. Our
Investigation Unit has already made investigations and they have found
out that one person was shot dead during the funeral of Nation.

Can you please tell us whether there is anybody who witnesses the
shooting when your son died?

MS BAHUME:

Ntsomi is one of the witnesses.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Is Ntsomi -was Ntsomi there?

MS BAHUME:

Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Where was Nation shot?

MS BAHUME:

It was just a few metres from my place. The first street next to my
house. It is between the first street and before you can reach the second
street.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Do you know the name of this street?



MS BAHUME:

It is Njela Street

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Do you have any details as to why your son was shot dead? Because we
realise that - okay we understand that he was a member of the Students
Representative Council, but you could give us details maybe about the
information surrounding his shooting.

MS BAHUME:

I cannot tell, because as I said before they went away with his friends.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Did you ever go and lodge a complaint or lay a charge against anyone?

MS BAHUME:

No I didn’t, because I didn’t know what to do thereafter and the other
thing is that I knew that the police were the same people, they were the
culprits so how could I go to them.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Okay, the other day you said after a year after your son’s death you
received a letter.

MS BAHUME:

Yes I received a letter.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you explain the contents of the letter to us?



MS BAHUME:

Yes, it said I was ordered to go to court at 9:00

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Was - were you supposed to go to the magistrate’s office?

MS BAHUME:

Yes - I did go at 9:00 am. I requested somebody to accompany me. When we
got there we handed the letter over to a Coloured policeman. He ordered
us to get seated and he took the letter inside one of the officers. We
waited for quite a long time. When we saw that nothing was happening we
asked end of Tape 1, Side A … then what is happening and then they said
no, its finished everybody is gone.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So in other words you were called to go to the Magistrate’s office and
nobody informed you why you were called in. Were you just seeing people
going in and out?

MS BAHUME:

Yes it was - I was informed that it was going to be the court hearings
about my son’s death?

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

And then what happened?

MS BAHUME:

I was never called in - I just stayed there.



MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Do you know any final decisions about the hearings?

MS BAHUME:

I know nothing about it because I stayed outside until I left.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

I would like to inform you that we have something, because there was an
inquest during that time. It is reported that there were three policemen
who were found guilty about the incident - by - they were charged for
shooting and using the firearms for no reason.

I think we will have to get this information but there was an inquest and
we have findings to that effect. Three policemen were allegedly accused
for shooting your son dead. We are surprised now that you have never
heard anything to that effect.

MS BAHUME:

No I didn’t hear anything.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Mamma I think I have finished but I would just like to find out what
would you wish to say in connection with your son’s death?

MS BAHUME:

What do you mean by that?

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

What I mean is what would you like to see happening about your son’s
death.

MS BAHUME:

Nkosane has two children - I am looking after one of them and the other
one is in King Williamstown. I am now ill and I am receiving a disability
grant which is R410,00 per month. The children were also receiving some
grants which is about R120,00. The problem is that this is insufficient.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Is this R120,00 a grant for Nation’s children?

MS BAHUME:

Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

When did you first receive this?

MS BAHUME:

In the beginning we used to receive R520,00 and then it has been reduced
to R120,00.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

How long did you get this?

MS BAHUME:

I think we started receiving the grant in 1990.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

What was the money for?

MS BAHUME:

We used to get it from DC in 1988 and then they said the parents to the
children should take their birth certificates and go to us for assistance
from the Government so that they can be maintained. I think that happened
1990 and then the children were supported. They have been getting this
grant for quite a long time. I cannot remember whether it was in 1994 or
‘95 when the grant was reduced to R120,00. The R120,00 is inadequate and
I have to augment this grant.

What I can see is that it is very difficult because Jerry now who is my
son has to take the responsibility for everything, has to give the
children the school requirements and everything and Jerry now is having
his own family, he is getting it very tough to maintain two families.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you very much.

MS BAHUME:

Are we finished?

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Yes we are.

DR BORAINE:

Just before we - can I ask whether there are any questions or comments
from any other of the panel - Mr Potgieter?

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Chairperson, I will just check, can you hear me?



MS BAHUME:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you - I want to hear whether you got any comment. We have got a
note to the effect that the house where your son was killed had
approximately 25 bullet holes in the door. Do you know anything about
that?

MS BAHUME:

I never heard about it.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] or one of the advice officers in connection with the death
of your son?

MS BAHUME:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much.

DR BORAINE:

Ms Burton.

MS BURTON:

Yes Ms Bahume. Please I want to ask you a little more about the night
that Nkosane was killed. You said that it was near your house and you
mentioned the name of the street. Do you know if he was shot in the
street or in a house?

MS BAHUME:

He was shot in the street. May I say something. Because what I heard is
that the blood is still there, the blood spots were still on the street
so I asked his father to go and pour some sand to cover the whole thing.

MS BURTON:

You mentioned someone called Ntsomi who was there when he was shot, would
we be able to talk to Ntsomi?

MS BAHUME:

Yes.

MS BURTON:

And then afterwards you yourself were taken and asked questions by the
police and you said that they took some things from your house. What
things did they take?

MS BAHUME:

They took cans of gas. The other night they came there as they used to
come, they open at the back house - they were - they open there, I
believe that they thought that some of my children were hidden at the
back and they ask about the gas cans, what are they doing about them.

Because we had no electricity we were using the generator, they ask about
the wires, the gas cans. I told them that while we were busy with the
funeral - busy with Nkosane’s funeral people donated about these gas cans
to get light. So I don’t know whom do they belonged to and they ask about
the bicycle that was there - they took all those things. I can’t remember
the other stuff they took, as it was - as they were still with them now.

MS BURTON:

H’m.

MS BAHUME:

No I was afraid to go there and ask for them.

MS BURTON:

[indistinct] you have two sons Jerry and Marshall, is that right?

MS BAHUME:

Yes, I do them - I have two.

MS BURTON:

No other children?

DR BORAINE

Ms Bahume, we have listened very carefully to your story, we have taken
many notes. We have also especially made a note of your own circumstances
and the requests you have made to the Commission. The Commission will do
everything it can to be of assistance to you. We will obviously
investigate further.

	I want to express to you the Commission’s love and care. You have been
very brave. We know that you’ve felt it very deeply and to lose a young
son is very hard. We trust that God will bless you and assist you as you
continue.

Thank you very much for coming and go well, thank you.













