TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - MONDAY 14 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00594			

VICTIM:				THEMBA NDINISA

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	SHOT & KILLED

TESTIMONY BY:		NONTSIZI NDINISA [mother]



DR ORR:

Before I swear Ms Ndinisa in I’d just like to say again that if people
can share headphones - if you’re understanding the language that is being
used, please give your set of headphones to someone who doesn’t
understand so that as many of us as possible can take part in the
proceedings.

	Ms Ndinisa welcome, thank you for coming here today. Who have you
brought with you?

MS NDINISA:

[indistinct]

DR ORR:

Ms Ndinisa can you hear me? Can you hear me threw the headphones?

MS NDINISA:

Yes, I can hear you.

DR ORR:

Who’s the lady who you have brought on stage with you?

MS NDINISA:

[indistinct]

DR ORR:

Thank you, welcome to you to. Ms Ndinisa would you stand to take the oath
please.



NONTSIZI NDINISA		Duly sworn states



DR ORR:

I’m going to hand you over to Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela who will help you
to tell your story.

MS GOBODO:

I great you, there’s no need for you to put on your headphones because we
are going to communicate in Xhosa. My name is Pumla [indistinct]

MS NDINISA:

I’m Themba Ndinisa’s mother. They call me Mabridge, she struggled for his
country, he was a ANC member. He struggled for his country, he fought
with the PAC - the PAC was helped by the boers. They would - the police
would come to my house all the time. They would come in the middle of the
night looking for Mabrigde, I would ask what Mabrigde has done, they
would not tell me.

	They would look everywhere, they would search the entire house. They
would take wardrobe keys to search for him. When they would leave, I
would ask them what has he done. They would ignore me and leave.

Mabridge continued struggling - he was not staying at home. He would just
come and visit, just to see if I’m still well and alive. I would ask why
are you so dirty, why don’t you change your clothing. He would then say I
must not worry. He would say you must not worry that I do not eat at
home, I have an ANC member card that I use to eat. I go to shops and show
this card and I would be able to eat.

He would then leave. He continued in the struggle, in 1985 when he
started in this struggle.

In December Mabridge came to me asking for a clean shirt. I gave him the
shirt, I then ask why he does not change his pants, because they were
dirty. He then said I must not worry about his pants, I must give him a
shirt. I gave him the shirt - he left before Christmas. The last time I
saw Mabridge was when I gave him this clean shirt.

The next morning we heard that there are ANC members who had been stabbed
by the PAC. We did not yet know who it was exactly - two girls came to my
house. They said that it seems that my child is one of those that had
been stabbed.

I did not have any strength after I was given this news, I went to Mr
Landu. Mr Gwada who stayed in the same block as me. I asked them to go
and identify the body. They went to the mortuary - they came back with
his clothing. And I thought that my son truly has passed away - his
clothes were there full of blood, his white shoes were also full of
blood. I did not know what to do.

Leaders of the ANC then came to tell me formally about this. They then
put a case forward, I did not mention this in my report, but these things
keep coming back to me now.

Ganahans, before my son passed away, Ganahans came to my house. I knew he
was a PAC member, he pretended no to be however. He then asked where
Mabridge was, I ignored him because I knew he was a PAC member. He then
ran off. Other ANC members saw Gana, but he ran off. This is before my
son died.

Time elapsed and he was buried, ANC Capetonians came to tell me that
there was going to be a funeral for the few children that had died in the
Methodist Church. These four children were all buried at the same time.
My child was stabbed with three others. They were all buried together, on
the day of the burial the PAC members and the mothers thereof were
celebrating. They were all there in their normal venue where they would
hold meetings. They had white flags celebrating, the police were on the
PAC side. We went and buried my son.

After he was buried the police never troubled me again, the never
harassed me again, but a statement was given to the Magistrate. There
would be a case now and again against the PAC people, there would be
Gana, Kajahans, Vujohans, Sonabo Mkese, these were the perpetrators and a
few others.

We would go and listen as the ANC people - when we would get to court the
mothers of the victims would not be allowed to go inside the court. It is
only the PAC members who were allowed to go in. This continued until such
time that the case was withdrawn.

MS GOBODO:

Thank you very much ma’am, we realize that you are still hurting
especially when you think of his clothing. I just want to revert back to
the case that you spoke of. Who was accused, is this the PAC members - I
just need clarity about the accused.

MS NDINISA:

It was Sonwabo, Ganahans, Bulwana - I know the others only vaguely.

MS GOBODO:

Who had accused these people?

MS NDINISA:

It was the ANC leaders.

MS GOBODO:

Did the ANC members then take over the case - were the handling the whole
case?

MS NDINISA:

Yes, they handled the whole case.

MS GOBODO:

Where did this take place?

MS NDINISA:

It was here in Paarl.

MS GOBODO:

The case was here in Paarl, at the Magistrate Court?

MS NDINISA:

Yes, at the Magistrates Court. At the Regional Magistrates Court in 1985.
He passed away on the 25th but it is June ’85 transpired.

MS GOBODO:

When we look vaguely at the dates ...[intervention]

MS NDINISA:

I do not remember while I ‘m not clear because I’m now elderly.

MS NDINISA:

Do you remember the Magistrate that was in charge?

MS NDINISA:

No, I do not remember, but he was a white man.

MS GOBODO:

When you say that ANC members were not allowed to go inside the court,
it’s only the PAC members that were, could you please elaborate because
when you go to a court of law there is the accused and the accuser. It is
the accusers, the ANC members who were suppose to be inside the court,
could you elaborate.

MS NDINISA:

The PAC members would be called inside the court and we would not be
called. We would then ask the police if we could go in, they would then
say the case has been postponed.

MS GOBODO:

Ma’am could you tell us more about the ANC members who had laid charges
against these people.

MS NDINISA:

One was Djuo, but he passed away.



MS GOBODO:

And those that are still living?

MS NDINISA:

It was Bram, he is now in Kraaifontein, Bram Xhlomi.

MS GOBODO:

What does he do in Kraaifontein?

MS NDINISA:

He’s teaching there, he’s a school principle.

MS GOBODO:

Is he the one - one of the people who were laying charges and handling
the case?

MS NDINISA:

Yes.

MS GOBODO:

Would they know about this case?

MS NDINISA:

Yes, they would.

MS GOBODO:

I will revert back again, you unusually said the people who killed your
son are people who were in cahoots with the police. Is it fact - is it
what you saw or is it something that you sensed?

MS NDINISA:

These people would go - would be riding with the police in their hippos.
We would then peep and we would see that it is the PAC members that are
riding with the police. They would then call out:

		Comrade, comrade come this side.

	These were the PAC members, they would be riding on the Casspirs, they
would see me when I was in my house, as they rode by.

MS GOBODO:

Lets talk about Themba, what was he doing at the time?

MS NDINISA:

He was working.

MS GOBODO:

Where was he working?

MS NDINISA:

He was working for Jones at Langeberg here in town.

MS GOBODO:

You said Themba was in the struggle, exactly what was he doing that
depicted that he was in the struggle? Was he a leader in the ANC or was
he just a member?

MS NDINISA:

He was a member of the ANC, he was in the struggle together with the
other comrades. They would go from town to town together with others.
They would fight with the PAC people.

MS GOBODO:

Some people do not exactly what you mean when you say he was in the
struggle. Would he organize things like marches or what? Please be
specific.

MS NDINISA:

He was in the struggle for his country, thank you ma'am.

MS GOBODO:

You said that Themba has children.

MS NDINISA:

He has a child - a illegitimate daughter, but the child is not with me,
the child is with the mother.

MS GOBODO:

Is the mother here in Paarl?

MS NDINISA:

The mother stays in Kraaifontein now.

MS GOBODO:

Are they in contact with you?

MS NDINISA:

She no longer comes, it's been a while. She - the last time she came she
came to ask for Mabridge's death certificate and I gave her the
certificate. Saying she wants to put the child into school - that was the
last time I saw her.

MS GOBODO:

The people in the community that you think where involved in your son's
murder, are they still there? Are you with these people together in the
community?

MS NDINISA:

Yes, they are there.

MS GOBODO:

Could you tell us the situation between you and these people.



MS NDINISA:

They are within our community, they know - these are the people who know
how my son died. There are even people in my own house who know how my
son was killed. My neighbours - I don't know if I should name them.

MS GOBODO:

No that's not what I want, all I want is to know how you live together
now, considering that they killed your son. How do you relate with them?
I'm going to ask you the last question.

MS NDINISA:

We just look at each other, we don't talk about it any more.

MS GOBODO:

How did you feel threw the years as this was not spoken about? How did
you carry this burden in silence?

MS NDINISA:

Please put up the volume, I'm slightly deaf.

MS GOBODO:

How did you carry this burden threw the years?

MS NDINISA:

It was difficult because he was figuratively my husband, he was working
for my home. I have 2 sons, he's the one who worked for us.

MS GOBODO:

You lost a son and you lost a breadwinner?

MS NDINISA:

Yes, I lost a son threw the PAC. My son who is still alive was stabbed in
1991, he passed away - he was stabbed by a PAC member in 1991.

MS GOBODO:

You have two late sons?

MS NDINISA:

Yes I do, now I'm left with only daughters and they still at school.

MS GOBODO:

Ma'am it is amazing how much you have been threw. It's incredible that
you carried such a burden, but you are still alive. There's just one last
question, what is your request to the Commission?

MS NDINISA:

I request that I would be helped at leased to educate my children because
I have no money. My husband earns a pension, I also earn a pension, my
children are still at school - they need school uniform, I also request
that a tombstone be put up for my child. I am struggling, I have to pay
rent from this little pension.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you very much Ma'am, we had thought that you'd come to talk about
one son, meanwhile it is two sons. We really have no words to comfort
you, but we have heard of your request. We will try to help you, thank
you.

MS GOBODO:

Thank you, you can leave the stage now.

