TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - MONDAY 12 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00368

VICTIM:				ZO-MARIUS BOCKS

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	TORTURE BY POLICE & 							 DETENTION

TESTIMONY BY:		ZO-MARIUS BOCKS



MS BURTON:

Welcome, Mr Bocks before we begin, we welcome the members of the public
back again to our afternoon hearing and we particularly would welcome
Father Peter Rhodes, who has joined us - very nice to have you and to
have had your support in the preparations for our hearings over these
past weeks.

Mr Bocks, can you - are you going to use the headsets or are you
comfortable in English?

MR BOCKS:

Going to speak Afrikaans or English.

MS BURTON:

Denzil, are you going to ask questions in Afrikaans. Okay, right Mr
Bocks, will you stand to take the oath. Thank you.



ZO-MARIUS BOCKS			Duly sworn states



MS BURTON:

Adv Potgieter is going to lead your evidence.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you, Mary, good afternoon Marius - Zo-Marius. I hope you’re
comfortable there.

MR BOCKS:

Yes, I am - I’m happy.

ADV POTGIETER:

You’re most welcome here. I know you’re from Carnarvon, is that correct?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Yes, I think you have to pull the microphone closer, so we can hear you
clearly.

MR BOCKS:

Yes, I am from Carnarvon.

ADV POTGIETER:

Tell us, what do you do?

MR BOCKS:

I finished my studies last year in Business Management, I’m trying to
find a work, I’m working at a very small shop as a bookkeeper - a stock
controller.

ADV POTGIETER:

As bookkeeper you say?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is that in Carnarvon?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, that is in Carnarvon.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you say you’ve done a diploma at the Peninsula Technikon.

MR BOCKS:

Yes, in Business Management, yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Have you completed it?

MR BOCKS:

No - no, I still owe a subject.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you still have to complete?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, that is correct, I still need to complete my studies.

ADV POTGIETER:

What is your status, are you married or unmarried?

MR BOCKS:

I’m unmarried.

ADV POTGIETER:

Any dependence - any dependence?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, I have a son.

ADV POTGIETER:

How old is he?

MR BOCKS:

7 years.

ADV POTGIETER:

Your story takes us back to 1986, on 16 July ’86.

MR BOCKS:

Yes, that is correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

You were still at school then?

MR BOCKS:

That’s correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

Where were you at school?

MR BOCKS:

I was at the Carnarvon Senior Secondary School.

ADV POTGIETER:

What standard were you in ’86?

MR BOCKS:

I was in Std 9.

ADV POTGIETER:

Std 9?

MR BOCKS:

That’s correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

What positions did you hold at school?

MR BOCKS:

I was on the Prefect Council - I was part of that Council of Prefects.

ADV POTGIETER:

Oh, so it’s not quite an SRC but is it almost the same structure?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, more or less the same but the status is a bit lower than SRC status.

CHAIRPERSON:

[indistinct]

ADV POTGIETER:

As I say they have a bit of a stigma - bit of a air about them, but is
this the leading body that showed leadership in terms of students?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, that’s correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now, lets go back to that day, in ’86, the 16th of July. What happened?

MR BOCKS:

It was just after a break and I was in my English lecture room with Mr
Mohale. Then the Security Police arrived, Mr Du Toit and a Kriel - and a
Mr Kriel - and a person that I don’t know - I think it was Sergeant
Moodie - something like that. I’m not quite sure about the name but I
think that is what it is.

ADV POTGIETER:

So was he also a Security Police?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

The Du Toit guy you referred to, is he also a Security Police?

MR BOCKS:

Yes he was head - he was head.

ADV POTGIETER:

So they arrived at school, did they come to you?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, they came to the classroom and they were looking for me. I can
gather that it was because of a meeting that I’ve chaired. It was a
meeting on students that were detained before the 16th of June.

Now we wanted to plan to halt the school activities since some of our
leaders have been detained without good reason. So obviously that led to
them bringing to - coming - to the school and they saw me as a kind of a
instigator and obviously they wanted to stop me from intervening in
school affairs.

Slogans were written on our walls and, of cause, there were also a case
of students setting a office alight and that all led to intimidation and
resulted in the slogans on the wall. They then took me - the police - to
the shooting range - the shooting range.



ADV POTGIETER:

Now, where is the shooting range - in town, out of town?

MR BOCKS:

About 2 km out of town.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is it very silent there - is it a quiet spot?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, it is a very quiet spot. Only people there, in the immediate
vicinity, would know what’s happening.

ADV POTGIETER:

So they took you there, in the outskirts of town. What happened there?

MR BOCKS:

They took me there - they tied me to a pole.

ADV POTGIETER:

With what did they tie you up?

MR BOCKS:

No, they chained me, then they got hold of some bags and they’ve pulled
that over my neck - they wetted the bags, pulled it over - and then they
tied it close with a rope. And now I had the situation it’s a wet bag -
they hit me - I yelled - they yell at me - the people mistreating me like
this were Du Toit, Kriel and this Moodie guy.

This went on - this treatment went on a considerable time - and at some
stage I lost my consciousness and they - but they carried on hitting me -
assaulting me. At some stages I was not even experiencing it, I just had
this awareness that I was hit by a baton. Then they would refresh the bag
and re-pull it over my head.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you are tied up all this time? Where, your hands and feet?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, both hands and feet - I was tied up. In the beginning they also shot
at me while my face was covered. I couldn’t see whether they were
actually doing it, but I heard the shots - I - and I gathered that they
were shooting at me. After regaining my consciousness I heard a dog - how
the dog came there, I don’t know.

I don’t know whether they’ve planned this or what happened but I saw them
planning to tie my private parts to fish line and they would - they
planned to tie this line to the doorknob so that if somebody closes the
door, so I would have to move forward and if I would move forward, the
dog will bite me. I don’t know what went

- got into them.

They must have been crazy and this is what they’ve planned, but instead
of them pulling this through, they decided not to continue with that -
they, to the contrary, decided to rather tie me up again and start
assaulting me again. I don’t know what made them do that. They went on
for a long time again - up to five o’clock, I think, that afternoon.

So the time I came back to the cells, we received our food - usually the
food were dished out about six o’clock.



ADV POTGIETER:

So for the whole day you were at the shooting range?

MR BOCKS:

For the whole day, from about 10 o’clock - tot - to about 5 o’clock I was
at the shooting range.

ADV POTGIETER:

Were you assaulted the whole time there at the shooting range?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, that’s correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you had this bag over you all the time there.

MR BOCKS:

Yes, that’s true.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did they question you - interrogate you?

MR BOCKS:

Well, it was quite simple questions. They wanted to know about my
friends, for instance this teacher that had an influence on me. They
wanted to know whether he was an instigator and whether he caused all the
riots at school and he - he - wanted to know about Gerald - friends like
these, what influence they’ve had on us. And they wanted to have all this
information regarding these people. They were detained, a lot of them.
They also wanted to know what caused the fire.



ADV POTGIETER:

So the interrogation was a - about the events at the school - they wanted
to know more about that?

MR BOCKS:

That’s right.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you refuse to answer they’re questions. What was your attitude?

MR BOCKS:

I was quite arrogant, later on I could actually not even feel them
hitting me, and I just decided I’m not going to leave my friends in
alert. I don’t want to - want them - to be hurt. And I was actually stead
fast in what I did.

ADV POTGIETER:

So because of your attitude, you were actually assaulted even more - that
resulted in that?

MR BOCKS:

That’s correct - yes that’s correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

So later on they took you to the cells in Carnarvon and tell us what
happened then.

MR BOCKS:

When we - got - got - came to the cells, I met some other friends there.
Wesley, for instance, was one of the people that gave me information.
Eshelle Andrias was also detained at the same time that I was captured.
They took him in a blue Ford car, I was taken in a bakkie. Now these
friends were there - they were left alone and they only wanted
information from them, but they look me, instead, and I was kept in a
cell. About a month in - in the cell in Carnarvon and then I was
transferred to Williston.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you were kept for about a month in the cells -in the Police cells - in
Carnarvon?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did they interrogate you even further.

MR BOCKS:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you were just locked up?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, I was just locked up.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did they tell you what they did - to you - that you were detained? Did
they give you reasons?

MR BOCKS:

Du Toit came there each weekend and then they would tell us something
about a Fourteen-Days-Detention Law and I was later on transferred to
Rooihel at Williston and it was - we were always kept for a period of
fourteen days and they notified us - with regard to that.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you say from Carnarvon you were transferred to Williston. How long did
they detain you there?

MR BOCKS:

Also for a month.

ADV POTGIETER:

And from Williston, where were you transferred then?

MR BOCKS:

I was transferred to George.

ADV POTGIETER:

How was you - long was you detained there?

MR BOCKS:

Also a month.

ADV POTGIETER:

And when were you released?

MR BOCKS:

It must have been towards the end of October - I can’t remember the exact
date. I know the exams have been completed and the schools have reopened
when we have returned.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you were detained from 16 July 1986 and released at the end of October
’86.

MR BOCKS:

Yes.



ADV POTGIETER:

And after the events at the shooting range, were you ever interrogated
again?

MR BOCKS:

No, not again.

ADV POTGIETER:

So, they’ve just locked you up?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, they just locked me up.

ADV POTGIETER:

And they left you there?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Were you all - were you convicted on anything?

MR BOCKS:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did they ever give you a reason for your detention?

MR BOCKS:

No, no reason. I was assaulted and locked up and they treated me the way
they saw fit.

ADV POTGIETER:

And as far as you are concerned, why were you locked up? What did you do
wrong?

MR BOCKS:

I think it was part of intimidation. I think it’s because they saw me as
a intimidator, trying to close the school, because we demanded that the
students, that were released, be - that’s been detained be released
before we went on with the school. And I think it’s because of that.

ADV POTGIETER:

How old were you then?

MR BOCKS:

18.

ADV POTGIETER:

What is the impact of this incident on you?

MR BOCKS:

To be honest, I’ve entered the course for Business Management but I have
really problems studying. It might be all the hitting on my head - I
don’t want to make excuses - I wasn’t that bright at school but the point
is now I really battle to concentrate. I find it very difficult - I
really battled last year - I struggled.

I prepare myself, I study but some days I just give the impression that I
might be lazy, because I just don’t have a focus. It’s although I go
blank and I can’t remember anything. Last year I’ve had a operation to my
knee. I’m a [indistinct] , there I asked the doctors to try and establish
whether I’ve lie - low or high blood pressure because I wanted to
determine the reason for all this. I’m usually very dizzy when I get up,
you know.



ADV POTGIETER:

Now, before the incident how was your health?

MR BOCKS:

I was at the doctor once before in my life - when my tonsils were
removed. So I’m - I’m - very healthy actually.

ADV POTGIETER:

You’ve given us evidence that they treated you with this bag - this wet
bag over your face. Do you have any effects of that - what happens if you
close yourself with a blanket, for instance?

MR BOCKS:

If a duvet or a blanket - if I have to live in a - lie under it and I
feel it on my neck, then I - I - feel smothered and I get very tense. So
I have to lie on my stomach, for instance.

ADV POTGIETER:

So if you pull the blanket up to high then you have the feeling that
you’ll be uncomfortable?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, that’s correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

Does this all happen after the incident?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.





ADV POTGIETER:

How do you feel today about the incident? I mean they’ve just left you
there for a few months.

MR BOCKS:

I’d like to put a question to the panel [indistinct] and is it for me -
is it okay from my side it’s impossible, and honestly to you, it’s
impossible for me to reconcile with someone, today, who’s still in the
Force, still influence people.

And the end of the day I must go back to these people, reconcile with
someone. Is there not a possibility that the Commission can do something
so that that people can be, at lease, removed form their positions?

ADV POTGIETER:

All 3 Police Officers, are they still serving in Carnarvon?

MR BOCKS:

I don’t - I’m not quite sure where Du Toit is - I think one of them is at
Beaufort. The other one, Kriel - you know the Government went so far that
they’ve actually - they did post him to - Carnarvon as well, again.

ADV POTGIETER:

So he actually was promoted? That’s what you’re saying ?

MR BOCKS:

Yes, yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Anything else that you’d like to add to your evidence? Any - anything
that you’d like to add?



MR BOCKS:

No, actually not - I just hope that the panel will give attention to what
I’ve put to them. You know, many things happened [indistinct] in the
Forces. They can influence someone else to do that - at lease please
remove them from the Forces. How could I reconcile with someone at the
end of the day , who’s on top of me.

If I can make an example of - if I can make an example of Biskop. My
Biskop - his a Biskop of my church, sorry, he will divide your
congregation - he will - and lets say he brakes up the congregation, how
can I reconcile with such a person? So that person will have to reconcile.



ADV POTGIETER:

Did you make - did you lay a charge at any stage?

MR BOCKS:

The Deputy of the Police Station, Attie Kriel - Attie Kriel - took
reports. I don’t hate him - he’s a very ordinary person today and he was
paid off, apparently because of alleged crime - alleged robbery, but the
statements he took from us he never took forward anyway. He is just a
ordinary till man in our town today. So - so - our cases were not
followed up at all.

ADV POTGIETER:

Marius, we thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Any questions, Dr Ramashala?



DR RAMASHALA:

Mr Marius, you say that you suffer from dizziness?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.

DR RAMASHALA:

And you’ve had medical assessment done?

MR BOCKS:

Yes.

DR RAMASHALA:

And what did the doctors say?

MR BOCKS:

No, sorry I told - I tell a lie. What happened is like - I went to the
doctor at that stage, Dr Neeht. Today he is not in my home town, but what
happened he only give me pills for my kidney cyst - the only way - I told
him everything what happened with me, but unfortunately he’s just taking
it cool because it’s his brothers who done that to me.

DR RAMASHALA:

And you still suffer dizziness today?

MR BOCKS:

Today still and had have even a problem with my kidneys because laying on
the floor, that side.

DR RAMASHALA:

Okay, thank you.



ADV POTGIETER:

Any other questions?

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you, Zo-Marius. We’ve said that many of you young people made a
large contribution significant to the liberation of our country. Many of
you are victims and maybe if it helps you what you’ve suffered there -
those years - actually have helped to bring us to this point in our
history where we are a country busting a democratic system.

I don’t know whether it helps to levitate the pain you know, if you think
back like this, you can say at leased that it was not in vain because we
are now experiencing the fruit of you efforts. Now and then we need to
remark that many of our young people have not enjoyed their youth and
they had to participate in this struggle in the way - like the people
like you have had to do it. But we want to thank you, we also need to say
that we have to remind ourselves that a very high price was paid for our
freedom and we must not waist our freedom easily. We thank you.



	

