TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - 22 APRIL 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00602

VICTIM:				JOHANNES TITUS [son]

VIOLATION:			SHOOTING

TESTIMONIES FROM:	MARGARET ELIZABETH TITUS

					MARILYN TITUS



DR BORAINE:

We invite Margaret Elizabeth Anne Titus to the witness stand and I
understand that she’ll be accompanied by her son Johannes Petrus Hendry
Titus. Is Ms Titus here? Ms Titus we’d like to welcome you to the witness
stand, we very grateful to you for coming along and coming along with
your son as well. I understand that you will be testifying is that
correct?

MS TITUS:

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

If that is so, then I would be grateful if you would take the oath.

MARGARET ELIZABETH ANNE TITUS		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much will you take your seat please. Ms Titus you have
come with your son and your son is the one who was so very badly injured
- shot and you will tell us that story. It goes back to 1976. It
obviously totally transformed your life, your family and particularly
your son.

And we want you to be very relaxed and just tell your story in your own
words and in order to assist you, advocate Denzil Potgieter who is a
Commissioner will ask you certain questions, but of cause it’s your story.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Chairperson. Ms Titus prefers to give her testimony in
Afrikaans.

MS TITUS

Afrikaans.

ADV POTGIETER:

You are very welcome here, you brought along with you today on your left
your son, Johannes. And next to him is his wife, Marilyn Titus, is that
correct?

MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And your testimony will deal with the shooting incident in which Johannes
was injured is that correct?

MS TITUS

Right.

ADV POTGIETER:

Johannes is your eldest son is that correct?

MS TITUS

Yes that is correct.

ADV POTGIETER:

And as we’ve heard he is married.

MS TITUS

Yes he is married and he has three children. Actually what happened this
was in 1976 I was at work and my little girl phoned to say that he’d been
shot. He went to the fish shop to go and buy fish for the other children
still at home.

When he returned apparently there was a box in the road and he bent down
to pick it up and he was shot with an FN rifle. And I then asked my
employer to take me home. And I went to the scene where the incident
happened. When I arrived there the ambulance was there already and I
wanted to climb into the ambulance, but they told me no, you can’t get in
because he is already dead.

But in Hanover Park Avenue is a Catholic Church and the priest stood
there and he was also praying. And the priest offered me a lift to the
hospital. He first said where are you taking the child and they said to
Victoria Hospital. And he stayed in Victoria Hospital for a whole year,
he underwent eight operations.

And what they did he was on a respirator and they had to keep him alive
artificially and after a year, he was discharged from hospital - no
before he was discharged from hospital Dr Liebenberg told me that the
whole in his stomach could not be repaired because if they were to repair
it, he’d die and then. I then transferred him to Groote Schuur Hospital
and there they performed the ninth operation on him and repaired the
whole in his stomach.

And subsequently a policeman came to me and apologised for having shot
the child. He said he was very sorry, this is one from the Philippi
police station, he said that he also had a wife and children and that he
was very sorry that he had shot him with the FN rifle. Before he was
discharged from Victoria Hospital, a couple of policeman arrived and they
said that he had to go to Pollsmoor prison, so I went to the doctor, the
doctor said no, he is far to ill he is in intensive care he simply can’t
go to Pollsmoor prison in any event, then I took him to Groote Schuur and
there they did the ninth operation.

And when he was discharged I received a summons that he had to go to
Court. He appeared in Court and we were in the - sitting in the
courtroom, the Magistrate said to him look you’ve already endured your
punishment it’s not necessary for us to sentence you because you’ve
already had your punishment. And that’s how it happened that I moved from
Hanover Park to Mitchell’s Plain.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you, may I just interrupt you here. We are now talking about the
second incident, thank you- you’ve told us now what happened in 1976.-
’76 the shooting incident. I just want to put a couple of questions to
you to clarify the issue. Where were you living when this incident
happened. MS TITUS

We lived in Hanorver Park.

ADV POTGIETER:

And when in ’76 did this incident happen?

MS TITUS

It was I think in September.

ADV POTGIETER:

What - what were the conditions in Hanover Park like, were their riots,
what happened?

MS TITUS

Well I can’t really say, because I was working, but there were quite a
few people around the ambulance, a lot of policeman.

ADV POTGIETER:

But generally speaking what were conditions like in Hanover Park in
September.

MS TITUS

Yes there were riots during - this as during the time of the riots.

ADV POTGIETER:

How old was Johannes at the time?

MS TITUS

He was 15 years old. And I then moved from Hanover Park to Mitchell’s
Plain. One morning he walked to the shop, he wanted to go and buy some
cigarettes, it was about half past eight in the morning, and one of my
neighbours shouted come quickly they’ve put him into the police van, they
took him. I went to the police station and I asked them where is my child
and they said, you must go for your child.

And I went to Groote Schuur Hospital and I asked the doctors to please
give me his milk to hand it in at the police station because he couldn’t
tolerate certain foodstuffs he had to have this milk. The doctors gave me
the milk and I said to the doctors, please the policeman are refusing to
tell me where my child is, they said I must go and look for him.

And the doctors helped me to look for him, they phoned the various police
stations and eventually they found him at Victor Verster prison and he
was there for 14 days and he was sick because he still had a colostomy
bag and he was there for 14 days. And then after 14 days I just saw that
here was my son.

ADV POTGIETER:

I am just wanting to take you back a little bit, I’ve allowed you to tell
the whole story and now I want to go into - it’s in a little bit more
detail. During the shooting incident in 1976, where was he injured, which
part of his body, you can just tell us.

MS TITUS

Maybe he can show the public how badly he was shot.

ADV POTGIETER:

Yes, but perhaps you should rather just explain to us where he was shot,
which part of his body, in his stomach.

MS TITUS

Yes and he a lot of plastic tubes and he still has some plastic tubing in
his stomach.

ADV POTGIETER:

When you arrived on the scene, in Hanover Park where he was shot, was he
still there on the scene?

MS TITUS

Yes, the man sitting next to the ambulance driver stood there with my
son’s intestines in his hands, and he was - he was actually holding it
and carried it into the ambulance.

ADV POTGIETER:

Are you talking about his intestines?

MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you say that he spent a year in hospital?

MS TITUS

Yes he was in hospital for a whole year. He was on a life support machine
and a heart machine.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now as a result of the wound that he sustained, how has it affected him,
what is his condition now?

MS TITUS

Actually he suffers a lot he is more ill than healthy, he is really
suffering. And the problem with his legs, that is why he has to use a
stick, is not enough support in his abdomen.

ADV POTGIETER:

The operations you mentioned, there were nine altogether.

MS TITUS

Yes, but the doctors at Groote Schuur told me that they couldn’t do
another operation on him because if they had t o perform more, he’d die.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now were these operations all to his stomach?

MS TITUS

Yes.	

ADV POTGIETER:

Has he ever worked - has he ever had a fixed employment?

MS TITUS

Yes when he was a child he did some work at the Counsel, but then they
retrenched some people and he was also retrenched and he was still very
young. And after that they didn’t really want him back.

After the incident he went to work for Snowflake in Salt River. And the
employers there also explained that they couldn’t keep him on because if
anything had to happen to him, during work hours, then they would get
into trouble. So he did want to help me to give him a job, but they
couldn’t.

And my husband only earned R90-00 at the time and we had a lot of
children, so we really suffered. So it’s through God’s mercy that this
child is still alive today. And the Catholic priest also assisted me a
great deal. They were always support me, they took me to hospital in the
evenings, mornings, afternoons.

ADV POTGIETER:

Apart from the shooting, the wound to his stomach, anything else that was
wrong with him after the incident?

MS TITUS

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

And mentally?

MS TITUS

The doctor told me that he’ll never be the child that he use to be before
the incident and he is a bit difficult now. He frigates with his clothes
and his - he doesn’t remember to well, he is not quite normal like other
children. So he is not quite mentally sound after the shooting yes that
is so.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now you say that after the incident, a policeman came to visit you.

MS TITUS

The policeman came to our house to apologise, he said that he was very
sorry for having shot the child, because he also has a wife and children.
ADV POTGIETER:

Do you know this policeman?

MS TITUS

No I don’t.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you say that he was from the Philippi police station.

MS TITUS

Yes, but I must just tell you, his wife has a lot of trouble with him and
I am really sorry because he is my oldest child, he has a wife and three
children.

ADV POTGIETER:

You say that after the incident he was taken to Court.

MS TITUS

Yes he was taken to Court. And the Magistrate said that he finds him
guilty, but that he has already served his sentence. He is already been
punished.

ADV POTGIETER:

What was alleged in Court - what was the charge?

MS TITUS

No they didn’t - they didn’t say - they just said that they convicting
him.

And you said that later you moved to Mitchell’s Plain is that correct?

MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And was he locked up again?

MS TITUS

Yes he was picked up one morning on his way to the shop and they picked
him up. They said it was the State of Emergency, but that time of the
morning it was 8:30 when they picked him up and they refused to tell me
where he was. They told me I must go and look for him myself.

ADV POTGIETER:

So they told you - he was picked up under the State of Emergency.

MS TITUS

Yes but it was 8:30 in the morning, and it was just because he went to
the shop.

ADV POTGIETER:

You say he spent 14 days in Victor Verster Prison?

MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And he was then released?

MS TITUS

Yes after 14 days.

ADV POTGIETER:

He was never charged?

MS TITUS

You see something that makes me very sad is that night and day I couldn’t
sleep, I worried so about where is my child and the doctors from Groote
Schuur eventually found out where he was, they found him at Victor
Verster.

ADV POTGIETER:

What is his situation now?

MS TITUS

Sir actually to tell the truth, he receives a maintenance grant of
R410-00 a month and out of that he must pay his rent, water, and his wife
also receives maintenance. She has two credit cards that she must pay and
she’s got three children to look after.

ADV POTGIETER:

How do you feel about the shooting incident in which your son was
involved?

MS TITUS

Oh! sir the child is still - still suffering as a result of it, he is
really still suffering.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is there anything else that would like to add or something, a request
that you would like to make to the Commission.

MS TITUS

Yes well that’s why I am here today. I want to ask, you see they got a
house, but they got nothing in it.

ADV POTGIETER:

You say that he’s got three children.



MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

How old are they?

MS TITUS

8, 7 and 3.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is there anything else you’d like to add?

MS TITUS

I really just want to ask for assistance for them because financially
really they suffering. They waited for ten years for a house, but he is
still under medical treatment at the day hospital. He still receives
treatment at the hospital.

ADV POTGIETER:

Until this day?

MS TITUS

Yes and that’s why I brought the papers so that you can see he is still
receiving medical treatment at the day hospital.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much - is your daughter-in-law is there anything she would
like to add? Oh! I just wanted to ask if there is anybody who wants to
put a question - do you want to put a question.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER:

When Johannes was shot, was anybody present, any eyewitness to this
incident?

MS TITUS

Well my one little son went to look for him, because they wanted to eat
the fish and he was 10 years old the other son and he just mommy, the
only thing I could do - I just had to run because the boere they aimed
the gun at him.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

Was he the only child shot on that particular day?

MS TITUS

Yes he was the only child walking down the road.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

Did you ever find out the policeman’s name?

MS TITUS

No, the policeman came to my house that night, he didn’t give his name.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

Did you ever go to an attorney?

MS TITUS

Yes, I went to Mr Ebrahim and he represented him at Court.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

And what was the charge when he appeared in Court?

MS TITUS

It was such a long time ago, the only thing I know is that the Magistrate
just said you are guilty - I find you guilty, but you’ve already served
your sentence and you’ve already been punished. That’s all I can remember.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

And the name of the priest who took you to the hospital?

MS TITUS

I can’t remember, I just know it’s the Catholic Church in Hanover Park
Avenue, it’s on the corner there, but I can’t remember the priest’s name,
it’s too long ago.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you very much, we very grateful that you came here today to pour
out your grief. To reveal it to us all. We hope that we will be able to
assist you in answering your questions and giving you some assistance.
May I just ask that he shows the public where and how he was shot?

DR BORAINE:

You are Ms Marilyn Titus?

MS TITUS:

Yes.



DR BORAINE:

[indistinct] to add something to the story, are you prepared to take the
oath.

MS TITUS:

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

Would you stand please.



MARILYN TITUS				Duly sworn states

DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Mr Chairman, madam you wanted to add something to the testimony
already given by your mother-in-law regarding the circumstances - your
own circumstances and those of your family is that correct?

MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

You could go ahead and tell us.

MS TITUS

I just wanted to say that - that Johannes Titus has suffered a lot for
the 10 years that I’ve looked after him, he has been more sick than
anything else. He can’t tolerate food like other people and he lives on
jelly, custard and ice cream. And he has to visit the doctors a lot and I
have a house, no 10 Waterval Street in Mitchell’s Plain and I got the
house two months ago and as you know rent is very high.

He receives R410-00 a month and I receive R991-00 a month, but the money
which he receives he has to use to pay the rent ,water and electricity
and I have to use my money to pay for food, clothes and so forth for the
children.

ADV POTGIETER:

Do you work?

MS TITUS

No I don’t work.

ADV POTGIETER:

Do you receive a grant?

MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And also some maintenance for the children. How long did you have to wait
for the house?

MS TITUS

10 Years.

ADV POTGIETER:

Your children Ms Titus refers to their ages, could you just mention them
again, how old are they?

MS TITUS

One is 8.

ADV POTGIETER:

Are they girls or boys?

MS TITUS

The girl is 8, she’s at school, and the one is - the youngest is 5,
turning 6 soon and that’s the middle child and the baby is 3 and that is
a girl.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you have two girls and a boy?

MS TITUS

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Anything else you’d like to add.

MS TITUS

That is all I’d like to say.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER:

Thank you very much, I just want to ask, madam does your husband any
special aids or do you look after him during the day?

MS TITUS

Yes I look after him but he is so often ill, he can hardly sleep.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

How do you think the shooting affected him?

MS TITUS

It affected him a lot, he can’t remember things, his memory is very bad.
And a very nervous kind of person and mentally he is not entirely sound.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

Does he visit the doctor?

MS TITUS

Yes every month he goes to the doctor.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

Any other questions - thank you very much.





