
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 1 - MONDAY 5 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00724

VICTIM:				SIWANANA CHAKATHA [husband]

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		SHOT AND KILLED BY POLICE

TESTIMONY FROM:		NOLIBAZISA FLORENCE CHAKATHA



CHAIRPERSON: ... and to express our appreciation to you for your
willingness to come to the Commission. You have already met with some of
our staff, we have talked with you and listened to you already but now
you are here in front of the Commission, in front of the audience and a
much wider audience throughout the country. We are very-very grateful to
you, we understand that the story that you are going to tell is a very
sad one. And full of pain and it's not easy. We do understand that, we
hope that you will feel as relaxed and as comfortable as is possible in
the circumstances. Before we proceed and hear your story, I'd be very
grateful if you'd stand for the taking of the oath.

NOLIBAZISA FLORENCE CHAKATHA		Duly sworn states		

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much please be seated. Ms Chakatha you I
think know that it is our practice to ask one of the Commissioners to
assist every witness without interfering with them but trying to be of
some help. In this instance I will be doing that with you, and I want to
ask you please to tell us by way of beginning of who you are and
something about your family and where you live before you tell us what
happened on that awful day in 1990.

DR BORAINE: You may begin. --- My name is Ms Chakatha I am

living in Site B, in NY05. I have two children and I live

with them in my house.

	Thank you very much, now on 25th of October 1990 your husband was
participating, taking part in a march organized by Site B residence, is
that right? --- Yes it's right.

	Now you weren't at the march but many people have told you what
happened, can you tell us what you think happened on that day please. ---
Yes I can tell you. This was on the 25th of October it was during the
week and people had not gone to work. This march started at Philani,
proceeding through the main road to Site C. And the aim of the march was
to take some papers, many papers to Hoza. They marched down the main
road, taking the papers with the grievances to Hoza. When then were at -
just before they got to Site C next to the robot they - they saw some
pigs. And vans - and sedan cars that belonged to the police, then that's
where my husband was shot over the bridge. He was shot because there were
alleged that he - it was alleged that he had something that he was
hiding. Whereas he had a jacket, a heavy jacket on. So he fell and the
friend who was standing next to him, asked the white men who had killed
him, what he had seen or what he had found and this white man said he had
found nothing and my - the friend said kill me too and shoot me. Then the
march proceeded, and the others turned and came to me to report and told
me that Siwanana had died. This was painful to me because this happened
in my absence. It was a week that I was at home, away in the rural area
and it - my husband left me in a shack where I still live with my two
children.

	Thank you Ms Chakatha. Just a couple of questions to help

us, first do you have any memory of what the grievances were

which prompted or made them decide to go on a march, what was their
grievances. --- I still remember people were saying we should pay rent
for our shacks, so those grievances were based on that.

	Thank you, tell us a little bit about your husband, can you remember how
old he was when he was shot? --- I can't remember how old he was then
otherwise he was born in 1949.

	Thank you, that helps, can you tell us was he working at the time when
he was taking part in the march, did he take a day off from work or was
he unemployed? --- My husband was a worker at [indistinct] on this
particular day of the march, people did not go to work.

	Thank you, was your - your husband obviously was concerned about the
grievances and joined with his colleagues and comrades was he very
politically involved at all. Did he belong to a particular party or
organization? --- Yes he was a member of the ANC as most people were in
that march.

	Thank you, you mentioned that he was wearing a long jacket, is this the
jacket that's know as 'Dlamini' in Xhosa? --- Yes it is.

	Is it a fairly traditional jacket that people wear why do they call it
'Dlamini'? --- Yes it's a jacket that is normally worn by the people and
my husband liked it, this jacket.

	All right and you say that when his friends were their names Spokes and
Mabija? Were those the two that were with him? --- Yes.

	And they - did they - when they challenged the policeman

after he had shot your husband and you said the policeman thought

that there may be something that he was carrying, did they - did they
look and see if there was anything under the 'Dlamini'? --- They did
search but they didn't find anything underneath this coat, 'Dlamini'.

	And the policeman was he sorry for what he had done? --- From what I
hear from his friends, they say he felt bad after he had fallen,
especially when the friends asked him to look for what he said he had
hidden underneath the jacket.

	Did you ever meet the policeman? --- No I had never met him.

	Do you know - do you know his name? --- His name is known to my
husband's friends. So if we talk to your husband's friends who were
there, they can give us that name? --- Yes they can.

	Thank you, can you tell us, was there any Court case or any inquiry that
you know about following your husband's death? --- There never was any
investigation, and nothing happened about the death of my husband, no
investigation whatsoever.

	So let me be clear on this until today you have had no word as to why
your husband was killed, who killed him and what happened at any
investigation, there was none. --- No - no up to day, I have not had
anything.

	Now this was five years ago almost, well more than five years ago. It
was after the changes had started in this country. Which makes it
doubleley tragic that your husband was shot. What do you - how do you
cope today, how do you manage. Do you have a pension, do you work, how do
you manage? --- I am not working, I just a grant for my children which is
minimal amount, I get

R120-00 for each child. So I get R240-00 and this makes it

difficult for me to cloth this children. I use this money to buy food,
and my fear is that we live in a shack and if the shack could burn, then
I would never be able to built a house for myself.

	Ja, I can understand that. How old are the children please? --- One is
twelve years old she was born in 1983 and the second one is eight years
old.

	Thank you very much, before I ask my colleagues if they would like to
ask you any further questions, let me ask you if there is anything else
you would like to add, or any request that you would like to make to the
Commission. --- There is a request that I would like to put forward which
is that I should get a decent living please and secondly that my children
should be educated like other children who still have fathers. Because
the money that I get as a grant is too small and I can't do anything with
it. And I can't even get employment.

	Thank you we have heard what you have said, let me ask my colleagues if
they have any further questions or comments. mr Potgieter.

MR POTGIETER: Ms Chakatha what are the ages of your two children? --- One
is twelve years old and the second one is eight years old. And are they
boys or girls? --- The first one who is twelve years old, is a girl the
second one who's name is Sacunchi is a boy.

	Have you spoken to an advice office or a lawyer or an organization in
connection with the death of your husband a possible claim? --- No it's
the first time that I talk about this

here to you in this hall. I've never approached anyone about the matter.

	Thank you very much for that information.

CHAIRPERSON: Ms Chakatha can I just ask you one last question. Your - the
friend who were with your husband on that march when he was killed
mentioned that the policeman concerned was upset and felt that he had
shot someone, who he shouldn't have shot at all, and he wasn't carrying
any weapon. If that policeman were to approach you today, what would you
feel and what you say? --- Because of the pain I am bearing, I really
don't know what I would do. On the other hand I wish I could see him so
that he can help me with my children to bring up my children.

	Thank you very much Ms Chakatha, you have lost - I beg your pardon, I am
sorry Ms Burton would like to ask to ask a question.

MS BURTON: Thank you Chairperson it's perhaps not so much a question but
you refer Ms Chakatha that day of the march was just a few days, a week I
think after the attack on the home of the Chairperson of the Khayelitsha
Civic, Mr Mapongwana and everybody in Site B area was very angry. Did you
know about that, I know you were in the Transkei? --- I heard about it at
the time I was in Transkei.

	And then on the same day that your husband was killed, the records show
that maybe another eight or ten people were also killed that day. Did you
know about that - did you know about that? --- Yes I heard about that
too, and I also got a paper.

	So when we try to find out more about your husband's death and about
anything that can be done to help you, we will also try to find out what
happened to those other people, so that we can paint a picture of the
things that happened on that day to your husband and to other members of
the community as well.

CHAIRPERSON: Ms Chakatha I want to thank you again for coming before the
Commission. We have heard your story of lost, of grieve but also we have
heard about your struggle to look after your two children without a
father, without a husband. We have heard your request to the commission
and we will certainly convey those requests and do as much as we possibly
can against the background of many-many-many request that come to us from
around the country. It's impossible to measure the pain that you have
endured, and we hope that by coming here today, it will take something of
the burden away from you and the ache in the heart, because it begins to
be shared by the Commission and by those who have heard you. We wish you
much strength and ask that God will give you the courage and the guidance
to continue as you look after your own children and yourself. Thank you
very much for coming.



