TRUTH AND RECONCILATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 23 APRIL 1996



CASE NO:				CT00706

VICTIM:				LENNOX MAPHALANE [son]

VIOLATION:			KILLING

TESTIMONIES FROM:	SISANA MARY MAPHALANE

					THEMBILE MALE



DR BORAINE:

The next witness before the Commission is Sisana Mary Maphalane and I ask
her to please come forward now and together with her Thambile Male who I
think wants to give additional evidence. Good afternoon Ms Maphalane.

MS MAPHALANE

Good afternoon.

DR BORAINE:

You can hear me through the earphones - can you hear the translation? Can
you hear all right now, fine. Thank you.

MS MAPHALANE

Yes I can hear clearly.



DR BORAINE

[Indistinct] to welcome you here this afternoon to the work of the
Commission and before you give your story, would you please stand and
take the oath.



SISANA MARY MAPHALANE		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you, you may be seated please. And then Thambile Male will you
stand please.



THAMBILE MALE				Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much. Ms Maphalane we will start with you, because you are
the chief witness and it concerns your son - your son Lennox and again
you have a very sad and tragic story to tell which is very familiar to
what we’ve heard earlier today, but very-very special for you, because it
was your son, who was killed.

Pumla Gobodo is going to lead you and she will assist you in your story,
thank you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you Alex and to you Mr Chairman, mamma you can take off your
earphones, but I am going to start and give the people here a small - a
short briefing back information on all the experiences we hearing of
today and in other days. I’d read briefly what they tell us, by way of
background into events that involve the lady who sits in front of us and
the gentleman who is going to give added witness.

In early 1986 a group of men who came to be know as the wit doeke because
of the white scarves they wore around their heads lead a continued
assaults on squatter camps in Nyanga, Crossroads and KTC. It was widely
alleged that there was police complicity in the destruction who did not
act against the wit doeke and stopped the burning down of the camps and
the daily killings of people. Indeed it was suggested that some police
were engaged in arson and killing themselves.

Ms Maphalane’s son was amongst those who were killed. This is what she is
going to tell us today. Mamma you can take off your earphones. You too -
you can also take off your earphones. Mamma firstly I am going to welcome
you just like Dr Boraine has done. Please tell us briefly about you,
where are you from, when were you born, and how did you come to Cape Town.

MS MAPHALANE

Can I start?

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Yes you can.



MS MAPHALANE

I was born in Somerset West. We came to settle here in Cape Town, my
parents, when we got here my father bought a house in Nyanga, that’s
where I grew up. I got married, I got eight children, one of them now is
Lennox the one who died.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

When did you come to Cape Town mamma on which year?

MS MAPHALANE

I was still very-very young. I was born in 1938. It was approximately
1940 I can’t remember. Thabang or Lennox as he is known.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Where - which position is he in the line of your children?

MS MAPHALANE

He is the last - he is the second last one.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you tell us what kind of a child was he Thabang?

MS MAPHALANE

He was a student at Enjonyo to me he was a very good child. He like
sports very much, he liked sport - soccer, he was playing for the Masarra
Club, he really liked school, he was a very good child at home, very
obedient.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So you think that he - he was an obedient child?



MS MAPHALANE

Yes he was.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Which std was in at that time?

MS MAPHALANE

He was in std 5.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Where was he?

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

He was at Enjonyo High - Enjonyo shcool at Khayelitsha.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Where were you living at the time?

MS MAPHALANE

We were at Nyanga, he was living with my daughter at Khayelitsha at that
time, because of transport. I asked my daughter so that she can live with
Lennox for the whole week so that he can come back on weekends.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Did you want this to be convenient for his school.

MS MAPHALANE

Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Were there any organisations that he was involved in during that time?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes there was a certain organisation though I didn’t know about it. It
was a ANC youth organisation.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Were there any problems that he brought home just before he died?

MS MAPHALANE

No there were none.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Were you ever visited by the police trying to see how was your child
behaving himself in this organisations?

MS MAPHALANE

No.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

We would like you mamma to please give us a whole picture of how it was
in the townships during this period just before you lost your son, just
give us this whole picture of it how the situation was during those days.

MS MAPHALANE

In 1986 there was too much chaos, too much fighting’s, these fighting’s
were amongst blacks. And also white against blacks, kids also involved,
it was just a whole lot of chaos from January to the end of the year,
people were dying right through, police were just shooting children day
and night.



MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

According to how - who told this - you said life in the township was just
death and you ended up getting use to it. How did you get to work because
it looks like the way you are saying this it was too much chaos for
people go to work safely.

MS MAPHALANE

People did go to work, I - I work [indistinct] but we managed, we managed
to go through these bullets you know, going to work between bullets. But
if there were too many shootings we wouldn’t go to work, we would call
our bosses and tell them that no we cannot come to work because of all
this fighting’s and violence.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Was that in 1986?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes it was.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you just explain to us again about this organisation, this wit doeke
according to our researchers they told us that there are these people
called wit doeke, that has white scarves.

MS MAPHALANE

These wit doeke people, were people from Crossroads, they were fighting
with people from our township. But I can’t tell you the exact reason for
their fighting. There was this particular police - policeman always
everywhere especially after - among the blacks. A certain group that
would be victorious out of all this groups. He would be now - this
policeman, Barnard would be just shooting at the children and he was
accompanied by other police. 	Are you saying some of the children were
also involved in this fighting?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes, the children were helping people of the community, people in - from
our own community in the township.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Where was your son in this whole situation?

MS MAPHALANE

My son was not among the wit doek chaos. When he met his death, he was
from Khayelitsha and Lansdowne Road.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you still remember where he was going to when this happened?

MS MAPHALANE

When he met his death he was coming to me at home, he was from my
daughter’s place, it was during holidays, school holidays, so he was
coming back to me. He was at Lansdowne - Lansdowne Road.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

What time was it when this happened?

MS MAPHALANE

It was around 5 pm.





MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Mamma please tell us how did you hear this.

MS MAPHALANE

The first time I heard about this, I was from work. When I got home, I
switched on the TV, little after that we heard machine gun sounds. I told
my children now this policeman have started again shooting and they were
- the manner in which they have shot this morning I am sure somebody is
dead.

At that time I didn’t know that my son was on his way to me. Around 6 pm
I sent his brother to the shop to buy bread. On his way to the shop he
met Leon my neighbour, he said to him, my son is Matthews, he said
Matthews, did you know that Thabang has been shot, Matthews said where is
he shot, and then Leon said at Lansdowne Road, they were fighting. And
while he was getting out of the bus, he was one of the people who was
running away and he was one of the first people to be shot.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

When did you hear this mamma?

MS MAPHALANE

The same - on that same day, it was on the 25th of March.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Did you hear this from Matthews one of your sons?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes he was told this by Leon our neighbour.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Please tell us how did you receive the news?

MS MAPHALANE

When I heard that my son has been shot, I went to my brother’s place I
asked him to call the police station to find out if there were any
children shot. At the Guguletu station they said no there were no
children shot there, but what - everything that has happened has happened
at the Lansdowne Road, we must now go to Phillipi station to ask. But it
was too late for us to ask this.

But now since I was waiting for my son, he wasn’t coming back so I
thought oh this must be the truth, he is one of the people shot. Now the
following morning at six o’clock, I went to my sister who lives at
Crossroads, I just wanted to find out from him if my son isn’t with him -
with her. So I came back on foot, searching the place of the scene, the
place of the scene.

When I got there, I found blood all over, then I could see for myself no
my son has been shot. When I got to Phillipi at Lansdowne Road I took a
bus to the police station at Phillipi. When I got there, I asked the
white policeman were there any children shot yesterday brought here by a
Casspir? One of the policeman said to me I don’t know anything, he said
ask that one. He said I don’t know anything, the other one said, ask this
other one. They just did that to me, eventually one of the black
policeman said to me, don’t [indistinct] this woman, so I was told that a
Sergeant will be the only one who can tell me this.

When the Sergeant came, go to the mortuary your silly children are in
there, that was the only answer that I got. When I came back home I just
told everybody that I was told that no I just have to go to the mortuary.

Yes indeed I went there where I saw him, yes he was really shot. He had a
bullet wound on his head and this people were also telling me that he
also had bullet wounds on his chest, they said when I asked to see, they
said no, they don’t have the authority to show me. So I simply left.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

I am sorry mamma I am going to take you back. What was actually the
difficulty for you so that you cannot be able to see your son on the 25th
of March.

MS MAPHALANE

Like I said it was already late, because we started at Guguletu station,
at Guguletu station we were told that there were no children there, there
were not shot children and it was already late now. So I went home, so I
told myself that I am going to go again in the morning because it was
already at night now.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you mamma, I just wanted to make sure because at the beginning you
said you don’t really know exactly about this. So that’s what I wanted to
find out. When you saw him in the mortuary, what steps did you take?

MS MAPHALANE

I didn’t take any steps, I just went back home, and I was going to
prepare for the funeral. I didn’t take any steps at all. Except that when
I was already from the undertakers ANC people came to visit, they gave us
letters that said we can go to the lawyers. After we had already buried
our children. No we didn’t get anything for their deaths.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Who were your undertakers?

MS MAPHALANE

It was Mashlobe.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Was it in Khayelitsha?

MS MAPHALANE

No it was in Guguletu.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Was he buried alone or was he buried with others?

MS MAPHALANE

He wasn’t alone, buried with the others, because he wasn’t the only one
who was shot, they were four.





MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So this funeral was for four people?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes there were four coffins and the ANC came in to help. They helped with
half the amount of money that we had to pay.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

About the lawyer can you remember him?

MS MAPHALANE

No I can’t remember but he was in the vlak at Athlone.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Was that the last time this - you dealt with this?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes that was - I didn’t go back there again. The last time we went back
there myself with the other mothers, this lawyer said to us we must - he
asked that we should come back to him, he said to him no there is nothing
else that he can do. Because he already knew that the police were going
to say that these children were throwing stones at the you - at the
police, so there is not going to be any case.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you still remember the reasons on the certificate’s what was written
in there - what was the reason of his death?

MS MAPHALANE

I have the certificate but I never really thought about - but I never
read it. I never read what was written in there. I never took it even
then, it’s only now that I took it, just now. I took it this month - I
didn’t take it during that time of his death.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you tell us what were the reasons why you refused to take his death
certificate that time?

MS MAPHALANE

I didn’t want to see a death certificate, I didn’t want to see anything
that was rated to this whole situation. Because this white policeman came
to me and said you know your children who are sent by the ANC to throw
stones at us. I am going to shoot them one by one. So when I heard things
like that I didn’t want anything to do with these deaths again.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So when you left you thought oh! our - the children were killed because
they threw stones?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Mamma is there anything else that you would like to add - things that I
didn’t ask you, anything specific?

MS MAPHALANE

There is only - there is only one thing that made my heart break after
the shooting of my sons, during their funeral, we nearly didn’t bury
these children. We were - we were tear gassed by the police. We couldn’t
go on with the funeral proceedings, we were helped by some of the priest
from Rhema Church. They were the ones who talked with the police, they
said to them you have already killed now this children, now leave them to
bury their sons, it was a heartbreaking thing.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

In other words he didn’t get a dignified funeral?

MS MAPHALANE

Oh! no.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Mamma I am going to ask you the very last question before I talk to
Thembile end of Tape 9, side A … … to - to us, what is your message?

MS MAPHALANE

What I can say to you is that I am very happy to be here to be called by
the Commission so that the whole world can see and hear how our children
died. I do not think that the children of this policemen could be shot by
this police at 15, my son was 15 years.

If my - if people throw stones to somebody, those people should be just
arrested instead of being shot on their heads and their chest and to
scatter people’s brains around.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you mamma, mamma I am going to take this opportunity to ask
Thembile so that he can also say his piece.

DR BORAINE:

Ms Maphalane I want to ask you just a couple of more questions. In your -
ja I think first put on the earphones, can you hear me all right.

MS MAPHALANE

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

Good, when you gave a statement and when you answered a question earlier,
you mentioned a man by the name of Leon, is that right?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes that’s true.

DR BORAINE:

Was Leon a friend of your son?

MS MAPHALANE

He was a friend to my children.

DR BORAINE:

And he actually saw what happened on that day.

MS MAPHALANE

When this happened on this day, Leon was there too, because he is the one
who came and told us. He is the one who came us - to tell us Thabang has
been shot.

DR BORAINE:

So he told you and he told your son Matthews that he saw Lennox running
away.

MS MAPHALANE

No what he told us was Matthews do you know that Thabang has been shot,
but I don’t know if he is still alive or he is already dead, but what I
know is he has been shot and I know that he has been put into a Casspir,
so Leon was the last - that’s the last time he saw him. But he didn’t see
who actually shot Thabang.

DR BORAINE:

He saw it was - the - he was shot by the police?

MS MAPHALANE

Yes.

MS MAPHALANE

Did they shoot at him once or more times? --- He only saw that he was
shot once and he fell, then he also ran away.

	And he didn’t see which policeman had shot him? --- No he didn’t see
which police was it that actually shot him.

	Do you remember that there was a Court case at Wynberg? --- Yes I
remember about that Court case in Wynberg.

	And did you go to the Court? --- No I didn’t go to Court, two policemen
came into my house and said to me, I am wanted in Court at Wynberg, I
said about what, in connection with what? --- They said in connection
with your dead child, I said I don’t want to hear anything about that, I
don’t want to hear about how my child was killed. I said I am not signing
anything, then I closed my door, so they left, I never went to Court.

	And the last question, do you - were you ever told by your friends or by
your family or by the police what the result of the Court case was. ---
No I didn’t hear anything about the Court proceedings.

	So you don’t know who was too blame for your son being killed. --- The
person I can blame for the death of my son was Barnard, he didn’t even
hide it to me he came to me and told me himself.

	You say that a policeman called Barnard came to see you. --- Yes he came
twice to my house. He came the first time and told me that if your
children do not stop throwing stones, I am going to shoot them everyday,
even on the day of the funeral, he came back to me with the tall - tall
policeman called Panic, they told me we don’t want to see any flag when
you go to bury your son, everything must just go smoothly I don’t want to
see any flags. If you - if there are any flags you are not going to bury
your son today.

	[indistinct] when Barnard told you that he had killed your son. --- Yes
he said to me I am going to kill your children every day. The first time
he came to me, that’s what he said.

	[indistinct] did he come to after your son died? --- He came to me after
my child was dead and again he came to me on the day of the funeral.

	[indistinct]

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you mamma, you can take your earphones off now.

THEMBILE MALE:			

MS GOBODO: Good afternoon Thembile how are you? --- I am fine thanks how
are you.

	I am fine too, thank you for coming today, we have been told that you
are going to testify also because you were there and you actually saw
this young men being shot. I am just going to tell everyone in here, as
you saw what happened you were - you were also shot, ja and you have
already witnessed. You are going around with a - also a bullet wound,
scar on your head. I just want to - I just want to remind you that you
are going - you still have to come and say your piece, but now you are
only here to talk about mamma’s case here. So you said you saw what
happened, please tell us what kind of a person was Barnard, just give us
a picture. --- He was a short man, he was a boer you will forgive me I
can’t really express myself well. He was short, he was a short man.

	Did he have beard, was he big was he small? Just give us that kind of
description. --- No he didn’t have beard no.

	Was he short, was he big or was he a small man? --- He is just like this
man next to you.

	Thank you, did you hear him once saying anything? --- Yes he use to
speak Xhosa. He was - he was one of those boers who could speak Xhosa.

	What was his tone when he was speaking Xhosa? --- He was speaking Xhosa
as a Xhosa speaking man.

	In other words would you say he was fluent in Xhosa? --- Yes he was.

	Thank you, ma please tell us about this particular day, you were with
this person - this man that we are talking about today, Lennox. --- I was
from work.

	Please speak a little bit louder so that we can be able to hear you
properly. --- We got out of the car, we saw a big crowd. I got out of the
car, I just wanted to buy an apple from Tyla. I saw Tyla.

	Is Tyla Jabulani? --- Oh! no Thabang, we use to call Thabang Tyla. I
said to him let’s go so we left, but that was the time we were shot at.
Now he was the one who was shot then I ran away. I was also shot, I fell,
I lost consciousness, later I - I could see lots of boers. And I wanted
to run, but one of the boers kicked me, he really kicked me hard - threw
me into the van, he threw me into a hippo. He threw me into a hippo there
were six people in this hippo I was one of those, I was the seventh one.
Then I was beaten up, these people were also beaten up. I tried to escape
but I have been - I was prevented by being beaten up, then I just got so
confused I was - I was hit by the back of - of the riffle.

	Where was Thabang at this time? --- I don’t know where he was. I left
him on the ground because he was shot. He was one of those six people
down there.

	How did you know it was Thabang. --- Yes I was with Thabang, I was
walking with him.

	Now when you were getting out of this car, you met Thabang, what
happened did you - did you call him. --- Yes I did.

	Could you please just tell us when the two of you were walking, when you
were from the car and you met Thabang, when did the police actually show
up?

--- No there were no police, they came in - in a van. I am not sure
whether this van had a [indistinct] or what.

	What about the people who were in that vicinity how many were they? ---
Yes they were quite many.

	What did they do? --- They ran away.

	Before they ran away what did they do? As we came on the scene and you
said the police showed up, what were the people doing in this vicinity?
The two of you, you and Thabang were just walking and what - what did the
people do then? --- The people just wanted to throw stones, but now there
were no boers at that time.

	When did the boers come in? --- They came in later and that’s when my
people threw stones at them.

	How did you see - how did you notice that Thabang has been shot? --- I
saw him falling then I ran.

	Now it looks like Barnard was a popular man. ---Oh! yes everybody knew
Barnard.

	Is there anything that you want to add? Maybe a question that I didn’t
ask. --- No - no there isn’t anything.

	Thank you, I don’t really want to take much of your time because you are
still going to come back, thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Is there anyone with another question?

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER; [indistinct] - can I just ask where were you shot?
--- I was shot at the back and on the head.

How did you [indistinct] --- I woke up in the hospital - I discovered
that I couldn’t speak, I couldn’t walk and my right arm - let me just
tell you that this whole side my right side couldn’t work. Even now -
even now I can’t speak properly as you can hear. I dreamed something when
I was asleep, I dreamed that I was talking, I was actually talking, I
could feel that okay now I can be able to walk, but I still cannot write.
I cannot read anything anyway, that’s another - that’s another thing,
that’s another difficulty.

Thank you.

MR POTGIETER: [indistinct] put to you what was the police version of this
incident. There was an inquest held according to our records where a
policeman called Lieutenant Bester gave evidence. He alleged that the
deceased Thabang was in a crowd that was throwing stones at the vehicle
in which this Bester was - was travelling. Do you follow that? --- No I
can’t really follow what you are saying. What I know is I was walking
together with Thabang, he was coming out of a bus, he - when I met him,
he was from this bus and he was going into Crossroads. He was going into
Nyanga bush - ja I am sure it was Nyanga bush.

	So in other words you never saw him throwing stones. --- No - no I
didn’t.

When - when you were shot - were you running already at that stage? --- I
ran after he was shot.

If I understood you correctly you saw him fall before you ran yourself.
--- Yes I did, I saw him being shot.

	Now when - where he fell was it amongst shacks or where was that? ---
It’s a short distance from the shacks, just a short distance.

	If - if the police say that [indistinct] that he was found lying amongst
the shacks on his stomach what would your response be to that? --- I
can’t hear anything, I can’t hear anything at all. I can’t hear anything
- I can’t hear anything.

	Shall I repeat - shall I repeat the - what I put, must I repeat? --- Ja.

	Okay, are you now connected okay good. I’ll just - I’ll just repeat just
again the evidence that the police gave about the incident, if they had
said that the deceased was found lying amongst the shacks on his stomach
after the shooting incident, what would you say to that? --- No I am
sorry I cannot express myself well. No that’s not so, forgive me I cannot
express myself well here, my speech is not good.

	That’s fine thank you - but what you are saying is that - what was said
by the police at this inquest is not so, is not correct? --- Yes that the
police were lying.

	[indistinct] thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you mamma for your presence here. We hope that the
commission will be - will try to investigate all this and try to answer
all your questions. We also want to know the truth, thank you.







	



	

	

	

