TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - TUESDAY 15 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00433

VICTIM:				RONALD ROBINSON

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	TORTURE - BEATEN TO DEATH

TESTIMONY BY:		PHEBEL ROBINSON [wife]



DR ORR:

Ms Robinson we now - it’s definitely the afternoon now, so good afternoon
to you. The person who you brought with you, is that a family member?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, my niece.

DR ORR:

Your niece, welcome to you too. Thank you for coming to support your
aunt. Ms Roberson - Ronbinson before we hear your evidence can I ask you
to stand to take the oath.



PHEBELE ROBINSON		Duly sworn states



DR ORR:

Thank you very much, I’ll now hand over to [indistinct] Wildschut to help
you to tell us your story.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Good after noon Ms Robinson, are you going to be giving your evidence in
Afrikaans?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, in Afrikaans please.

MS WILDSCHUT:

We will speak both English and Afrikaans, if you cannot understand what I
am saying please use the headphones. Just to explain to everyone we just
would like to ensure that Ms Robinson understands and hears clearly and
that we are able to communicate properly with each other. Ms Robinson is
just putting on her earphones.

Okay, Ms Robinson you have made a written statement before the Commission
involving the story of your husband, Ronald William Robinson, and a story
about his faithful death on the 29th of the 9th 1990 - 1992.

MS ROBINSON:

That’s correct.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Would you go ahead please and tell us what happened that night, also tell
us from your side how you understand this terrible story.

MS ROBINSON:

It was on a Monday evening, on the 28th of September and we were all
together as family. At quarter to 11 that evening - we had friends with
us by the name of Maria Keyser and at a quarter to 11 we parted and he
took Maria Keyser home. And I never saw him after that.

	At half past 1 that night I woke up and he was still not home. At 6 am
there was a knock on the door - okay - the morning of the 29th of
September at 6 am there was a knock on the door. I opened the door and
thought to myself but why haven’t you got your key, why are you knocking
on the door, thinking it was him.

And I went to open but it was his nephew or his cousin who had come. And
I said to him but Ronny is not home yet. And he said that I should go and
call his sister because at that time we did not have a telephone
installed in order to telephone Maria Keyser to find out what he has said
to her whether he had told her he was going somewhere or not.

And - and then his - Ronny’s sister went and phoned Keyser to find out -
what had happened to Ronny and all she could say that he had dropped her
and told her that he was in a hurry to get back home because he still had
work to do. Because he was working in Stellenbosch for a company called T
& G.

But he never got home that night, I waited and I asked his cousin to
please investigate at the hospital or look along the roads if he didn’t
see his car. He came back and said:

No there is no sight of his car at the hospital and neither is there

any sign of it at the Police Station or on the road.

I think it was approximately half past 8 - between half past 8 and 9 that
morning when I phoned Paarl East Police Station to say that he had left
the evening and that he has still not returned and that I would like them
to try and ascertain for me whether he was somewhere along the road or
whether he had been involved in an accident or if he perhaps took ill
along the road and pulled off the car and stopped.

	They then promised to investigate immediately. That afternoon at 1 one
of the policemen came and asked me:

Madam are you strong enough.

I was so flattened I didn’t ask him - then he said to me:

We found your husband’s body in the mountain, he has

been murdered.

That was on the 29th when they came to inform me. He’s been murdered, I
did not know what was happening. I did not know of anybody that bore any
grudges against him. I just don’t know.

	But what raised doubts in my mind and what raised questions which
brought me here is that in the first place I wasn’t allowed to go and
identify my husband’s body. The police simply did not want me to and
since the evening of the 29th they started watching my house. We were not
aware of that because initially there were a lot of people and a boy - my
sister’s son who I had raised was residing in Wellington. When he was on
his way home that evening, he came back to tell us the people - to tell
the people to come and look because the police were watching the house.

	And when the people went out to go and look the police drove off. My
question is why did they watch the house and if they were worried about
me and my condition why did not come to me and say madam we are worried
about you, that is why we are watching your house.

Why did they drive off, further more the matter was heard in Paarl. On
the 21st of February we were suppose to go to Paarl Court again after
they had apprehended Philander- the perpetrator. When we were supposed to
appear in court on the 21st , we were informed a day before the time that
the matter was being referred to the Supreme Court and there was no cross
examination.

The day we went to court we were told that the matter was going to be
finalized because the investigating officer - Adams - said that the
matter was being finalized. And I said today because this surprised me
because my people were far from me and they wanted to hear what was
happening. When we got to the Supreme Court the matter wasn’t even ready
to be heard in the Supreme Court.

	On the 11th we went again, the matter started at 10 o’clock and at
quarter to 12 it was - had been finalized. There was no cross examination
because the person who murdered him was but 21 years old. He was still
very young and tiny and Ronny was a big man, he was tall and he was hefty
built. That child couldn’t possibly have overpowered him and he couldn’t
even drive.

So if they asked - put one question to him and said you cannot drive a
car, how did you get the car away form the Ou Du Toitskloof Road to where
it was, I would have been satisfied. But that question wasn’t even put to
him.

	It was not put to him and that is why I am dissatisfied, I would like
the truth. Who is behind this whole thing or who was in on the murder
because my husband gruesomely murdered. It wasn’t just one stab wound,
his arms was slit open, he had several stab wounds on his body and marks
from where the had tortured him. That is not one persons work, the report
is laying there. I brought it with me who ever wants to read it can read
it so that they can see what happened to him.



MS WILDSCHUT:

[indistinct] very brave to tell us what you - about your husband’s death.
With your permission can we just go back a little bit more so that we can
understand the story very clearly. You were telling us about the person
who was charged with the murder of your husband. Do you know this young
man?

MS ROBINSON:

I do not know him but his name is Ruben Philander, I do not now him as
such.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Ruben Philander is in prison at the moment serving a sentence for the
murder of your husband?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, he was sentenced to 21 years.

MS WILDSCHUT:

[indistinct] you have misgivings about this, you have a funny feeling
about this case. Do you think that Ruben Philander was able to murder
your husband on his own?

MS ROBINSON:

No, definitely not.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Can you explain to us why you think that?

MS ROBINSON:

The manner in which he was murdered and the marks that was found on his
body. Philander was [indistinct] built, he was young and he wasn’t very
tall. He was about - short. Approximately as tall as the briefer.

MS WILDSCHUT:

So you’re saying that he was a young man, very small in comparison to
your husband who was a large - a big built man, strong man?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Do you feel that there was some political motivation for the murder of
your husband?

MS ROBINSON:

Definitely so.

MS WILDSCHUT:

It appeared as though it was just a criminal - a murder even though you
suspect that it may have been a political motivation?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, they wanted it to appear as such but I do not believe it to be as
such. I can mention a name but it - it is merely hearsay. The name Mervin
Arries - I do not know if he was a reservist policeman or what he was in
the Police Force - what he was in the Police Force but the Tuesday
evening he came there and he said to one of the boys that I raised:

I warned Ronny 3 months before the time not to drive - not

to drive around alone anywhere but his time had run out so

they had to do their work.

That is what he said, he did not say it to me personally but he said it
to one of the children who I raised in my house.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Mervin also said nobody must take about this advise that he had given
...[intervention]

MS ROBINSON:

Yes.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Because [indistinct] his life.

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, because there was a time were he was not in Paarl, he was gone from
Paarl until after the matter was finalized and then only did he come back.

MS WILDSCHUT:

[indistinct] you think that your husband would be the target of a
political murder as gruesome as his murder?

MS ROBINSON:

My husband wasn’t scared, he was not afraid of anyone and he fought for
human rights. He was a man for his community. He supported the poor, and
the people that were battling. So many times I said to him:

You’ve got no time for your own house and your own

family, we’ve got just as many problems but you are never

here when I need you.

And he said:

But my wife you know where I am going to and you know

my cause is a contribution to the struggle.

	So once again I say that he was not afraid of anybody and he stood for
what he believed in and for his community. There are many people here
that can bear testimony to that - to the fact that he stood for his
community.

MS WILDSCHUT:

He is seen as a community leader and seen as somebody who spoke out
against injustices in the Paarl community, he became a target and he
became [indistinct] to those who didn’t want people to speak our. Is that
so?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, look he was in the UDF, he was in the ANC, he was involved in the
workers organizations, in the T & G workers organization and since he had
linked up with the UDF there was a time where he was away - where he had
to flee. It was - I cannot remember exactly whether it was in August or
September in 1986. It was 1986 then when everyone has to flee for their
lives basically. And he had to - he could only come back after Christmas
the following year but I cannot remember the exact years but he was gone.

	And I could not even receive a telephone call for him, he had to phone
different people in order to contact me and I had to work in a very
slight manner to get to Cape Town to go and give him support on Sundays
and to see him. The girl that was born there by us, I took her with me
and he loved this child very much and I took her with me Sundays so that
he could see her and we had to spend the days on the beach and so forth.

	And it continued like that until he could come home, but in the time
that he was gone the police would come at night and come and ransack my
house to see what they could find in my house that would count as
evidence against him. And they would just - there’s something that I want
to mention today specifically. I would like them to bring DaniËls - who
was an Investigating Officer forward so that he can come and give
evidence as to who the informers were all these years.

	Where I was working at Langeberg and one day he sent people to come and
fetch me at my work and interrogate me as to where my husband was, saying
I knew where he as and if I don’t tell them now, my papers are ready. And
that they would send me to Robben Island if I refuse to talk.

So I said to him if it - if that’s what you want to do then so be it, but
I do not know where he is. And they wanted to know why didn’t you tell us
that your husband is missing and at the time my husband was unemployed.
So I said to him:

Would I come to you people when I have a husband that’s

not working and I am working for my house. Why should I

come to you people.

Because I did not want to betray him, I knew where he was. Because if I
remember correctly there was a time were he lived with Dullah Omar when
he was - when he was on the run, but I did not want to tell him to tell
him where he was. But I would like him to be brought forward so that he
can come and give evidence as to who the informers were.

MS WILDSCHUT:

You were harassed by the police and you also went through your own
suffering with regards to ...[intervention]

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, they came at night and they also came to my work. And they’d come -
the Paarl police would come and take me for questioning at the Police
Station.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Ms Robinson I have before me some really gruesome photographs off your
husbands body. I know it’s very terrible for you to go through this
experience. You did say that you were not allowed to see your husband’s
body at the time of the funeral. Where you able at any point to - to get
to know how badly he was hurt?

MS ROBINSON:

Look I saw his body after the postmortem had been performed but when the
body was found at the - on the mountain I was not allowed to identify it.
But after they had performed the postmortem and cleaned him, Solomon said
that he was going to fetch the corpse at the Police Mortuary and keep it
at his place.

And he called somebody to fetch me so that I could fetch the body at the
Police Station and that’s the first time I saw him. Than was
approximately 8 thereafter - if I remember correctly it was - he was
murdered on the Monday evening and the Friday I saw his body for the
first time and them I saw how my - my husband was murdered.

	Because he was fair but he did not have any color in his face because it
looked like burn marks and candle marks the way they tortured him. That
is why I doubt it because if the police weren’t after him for all these
years, I wouldn’t have had such strong doubts and reservations in my mind.

MS WILDSCHUT:

[indistinct] more questions to ask you. How do you feel about Philander?





MS ROBINSON:

I don’t know if I should say I hate him but as a Christian I suppose your
- you have to say that you have to forgive. But as I said if that was
God’s will that he should have met his fait in that way then perhaps I
should be at ease.

Because to hate Philander now is not going to bring my husband back to me
because I said at the time of the trial if the law want to acquit him
because they are dirty enough to do that, they can acquit him. But he
will have to live with his conscious for the rest of his live and that
will be his punishment. So I do not know if I should hate him or what I
should do, but I do not believe that I hate him because he got what he
deserved, but he has to come back with the truth. He has to come with the
truth, that is my feeling.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Listen you have moved me very deeply, I do not have any more questions to
ask you and I’ll hand over to the Chairperson.

MS GOBODO:

Thank you Glenda, any ?

REV XUNDU:

Thank you very Chairperson, so your request if I - if I want to
understand it well is that you would like Ruben Philander to give us
information as to whom he was when he - when your husband was murdered or
tortured.

MS ROBINSON:

Yes.

REV XUNDU:

Thank you.

MS GOBODO:

Denzil …END OF TAPE 2, SIDE B…

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] Robinson you said that you had some document - some
documentation with regard to the injuries. Was it - is that a medical
report?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Do you have it with you?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, I brought it along with me.

ADV POTGIETER:

Apart from the stab wounds, which other injuries were inflicted on the
body - which other injuries could you see?

MS ROBINSON:

[indistinct] marks as they dragged him along and I don’t know what else
they did with him. But it was - it’s a long report and I cannot say - I
cannot mention everything because the report is far to long. Because
every part of his hand, his fingers had marks, stab marks, scuff wound -
scuff marks from being dragged. I just cannot mention everything.

ADV POTGIETER:

Do you have any children from your marriage?

MS ROBINSON:

No we did not have any children, here is one of the children who were
adopted at the age of 10 years old and then there were 2 boys and another
girl who we assisted with their school education because we did not have
any children of our own.

A doctor who was born in our house by a women from Piketberg - after she
fell pregnant - her husband left when she was 3 months pregnant. She came
to us and the child was born there - the child is 13 years old now and
we’ve raised her. This girl got married again and after slightly more
that a year she gave birth to a boy.

	Her child was 10 years old when this child’s father was also murdered
just after my husband’s death - that was on the 11th of February when my
husband’s matter was finalized in 1993.

And then this child was born and then this child’ father was murdered on
the 15th of February 1993 and this child is now 3 years old - he’ll be
turning 4 and I am helping to raise him. But I do not have any children
of my own. As somebody said to me in other words I am raising the
communities children and I said yes, that is what my husband left me to
do.

ADV POTGIETER:

How old was your husband when he was murdered?

MS ROBINSON:

He was 45 or 46 years old.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you ever - as you say there was no cross examination at the time of
the trial - but did you ever receive any explanation or hear any
explanation on behalf of Philander about what happened?

MS ROBINSON:

Philander did not say a word.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you did not receive any other explanations with regard to that?

MS ROBINSON:

Apart from a report that was red there - what was it said - it was a - it
was said it was something to do homosexuals or something. In the report
it was said that it was merely a motive which was use but that the actual
motive was murder and robbery.

ADV POTGIETER:

So Philander made allegations of homosexuality?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes, that’s what they said.

ADV POTGIETER:

He tried to use that as motive for the murder?

MS ROBINSON:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And how did that strike you - how did you act - find that explanation?

MS ROBINSON:

I did just not except it - I did not except it because I said that if it
was something like that then they should have come forward and there is a
Law for that. Why didn’t they talk about that, so I just did not except
it.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much Madam.



MS GOBODO:

We would like to recognize your coming up here today as a celebration of
your late husband’s struggle for Human Rights. And his contribution to
the community helping those who were needy. We’d also like to remember
the suffering that you and other women who have given testimony this week
in front of the Commission - the suffering that you went through when you
lost your children, your husbands.

We’d like to remember with you the suffering that you went through when
you had to relate to your husbands in a secretive way.

	We again would like to pledge our commitment to do our best in the work
of the Commission to establish what the truth is about the death of your
husband. Thank you so much for sharing with us your pain, thank you.





