TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 19 JUNE 1996



CASE NO:					CT/00332

VICTIM:					ANIDA HARRIS

NATURE OF VIOLATION:		 SHOT DEAD BY POLICE

TESTIMONY BY:			FREDDIE HARRIS



DR RAMASHALA:

Mr Harris do you wish to take the oath.

MR HARRIS:

Ja.

DR RAMASHALA:

Could you stand please.



FREDDIE HARRIS				Duly sworn states



DR RAMASHALA:

Chairperson will facilitate the evidence.



MS BURTON:

Thank you - good morning Mr Harris.

MR HARRIS:

Morning.

MS BURTON:

I would - I believe you want to speak Afrikaans.

MR HARRIS:

Ja.

MS BURTON:

And is it all right if I ask you questions in English?

MR HARRIS:

Ja.

MS BURTON:

If you want to, you can use the earphones for the Afrikaans translation.

MR HARRIS:

I’ll do so.

MS BURTON:

Thank you very much for coming to tell us today about the killing of your
niece - will you please tell us what happened on that day in 1976.

MR HARRIS:

Well it was the 13th of September 1976 that was the year when the youth
rebelled and that was also the case in George. In Borcherds, that’s where
I live, in that particular year, the youth were in revolt and there was a
lot of stone throwing, they - they stoned the vehicles in Sandkraal Road.
And next to Sandkraal Road, there was a wooded area and the youth moved
out of the bush there to stone the vehicles.

	And then when the police arrived, they would run back into the bush into
Acacia Street to get away from the police. And many of us ran into
Lawaaikamp, that is the same Gracia Road which divides Borcherds and
Lawaaikamp.

	At about five o’clock, somewhere between five and six o’clock, people
started arriving home from work and there is a road on the other side of
this bushy area where the bus usually stopped to - for the workers to get
of. Now there was al little foot path through this bushed area to the
shop and it also went on to Lawaaikamp’s area. Now from this Gracia Road,
there was also a foot path leading to the shop and then on to Lawaaikamp.

	The police was shooting at people at that stage and they also shot at
the innocent workers who had just come from work. And they shot at us,
whom they thought was stoning the police vehicles and the police. It was
between five o’clock and six o’clock when Abida was on her way to the
shop, she wanted to go and buy some sweets. She was totally unaware of
all the dangers lying in wait for her. And it was at that stage that the
police started shooting again - shooting at innocent people. Abida was
one of those shot by the police.

	The people who were arriving home from work, were also shot, some of
them - they were totally innocent, they had just arrived home from work.
Now Abida was shot, she fell - the police picked her up - they picked her
up by the arm and the one leg and threw her into the police van. This
happened between five and six o’clock in the afternoon. And they took me
away as well.

	I can’t tell you whether they went straight to the hospital with Abida
or whether they still drove up and down, because at that stage anything
was possible. The police could do anything. When my parents went to the
police, they were told that Abida had already died, that she was dead on
arrival at the hospital. She wa 12 years old at the time - 1976. She was
in std 5 at Heidedal school, that is all from my side.

MS BURTON:

Were - were you present - did you see all of this?

MR HARRIS:

Yes I was part of a group of people stoning the police vehicles, I was
part of what happened yes.

MS BURTON:

You were part of that group but Abida was not, she just happened to be
there at that time.





MR HARRIS:

Yes Abida was not a part of this crowd of people who were throwing
stones, you wouldn’t expect that of a 12 year old little girl. She was a
totally innocent person, she was just on her way to the shop from Gracia
Street into the foot path which then leads to the shop - the shop is on
the Lawaaikamp side.

MS BURTON:

And Abida’s parents are they here?

MR HARRIS:

Yes, Abida’s father who is my eldest brother, he is dead already
unfortunately, her mother is still alive and she lives in Pacaltsdorp.

MS BURTON:

It is one of the many tragedies that we hear that an innocent child
passing an event like this, should have been killed and we very grateful
to you for coming to tell us about it.

	Would any of the other members of the panel like to ask any questions -
Dr Ally.

DR ALLY:

Mr Harris when Abida was shot, was she alone - was she alone when she was
walking to the shop - were there other people with her?





MR HARRIS:

No she wasn’t alone, she was walking along the foot path towards the shop
and the people who were coming from work, walked through this Bluegum
area, Bluegum foot path - there is another foot path which also leads to
the shop and - so there were other people who were also shot on that
particular day.

One person lives in Thembalethu unfortunately isn’t here to testify
today, but he was also shot at the time as Abida was and there is another
person, who unfortunately now lives in Cape Town, now longer in George,
he was a disabled man, a big man, he was on his way from work. He got off
the bus and walked through this Bluegum path, he was on his way to go
home and he was also shot by the same group of policeman who shot Abida.	

DR ALLY:

And are those people prepared to come and testify before the Commission
or have they done so, to make statements?

MR HARRIS:

Well I heard that the one person wasn’t - wasn’t certain when the Truth
Commission would be sitting to obtain statements from people shot in 1976
he is still living in George, he lives in Thembalethu. The other person
as I’ve said, the other person was shot on that particular day, this
person was on his way from work, he was going home and he was shot. His
wife still lives in George, but he now lives in Cape Town.

DR ALLY:

Would you be able to give these names to the Commission and you say these
people are prepared to make statements or the person who is still living
in George is prepared to make a statement.

MR HARRIS:

I will do my best to try and get hold of this person and just to tell him
to contact the Truth Commission.

DR ALLY:

It is extremely important to know what really happened on that day
because as you will understand it is many years ago and many of the
documents are not available anymore so the more people come and tell us
what exactly happened the better, it will give us a fuller picture of the
events. It will make our job much easier. It will enable us to get a
fuller picture of the events in 1976, the year when so many things
happened.

MR HARRIS:

Yes I will - I will tell these people when I see them .

DR ALLY:

The Commission is extremely sad to hear that such a young person was
killed in these circumstances, thank you very much, thank you very much.



MS BURTON:

Mr Harris just to let you know that our investigation unit have followed
up the - as much information as they can find, and they have got the
inquest records, which confirms that Abida died from a gunshot wound.
They have not been able to get the records of the - from the police for
that day, what are called the police deployment records. It looks as if
those records have been destroyed.

	Perhaps we could just repeat the Afrikaans translation again for Mr
Harris to hear.

INTERPRETER:

Could the Commissioner just repeat the question in English.

MS BURTON:

The - it wasn’t so much a question, I was just explaining that our
investigators have found the inquest records, which confirms that Abida
was killed from a gunshot wound but they have not been able to find the
police deployment records from that day. It seems together with many
other police documents that they have been destroyed or are missing.

	So we do need to try and get as much information as we can to complete
the story. And we thank you very much for coming to us today and as Dr
Ally has said, extend our sympathy to you and your family.

MR HARRIS:

Thank you.

