TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - 7 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:			CT/00397/KAR

VICTIM:			ELIAS BUKULA

VIOLATION:		SEVERE TORTURE AND DETENTION

TESTIMONY BY:	ELIAS BUKULA



MS BURTON

Can we stop for lunch now - [indistinct] one more. [indistinct] to the
stage now. This will be our last witness for the day. Mr Bukula please
will you come to the stage, sorry. Do you know whether it is his mother -
I will ask him.

Good afternoon Mr Bukula and welcome. Can you hear me all right?

MR BUKULA	

Yes, we can hear you.

MS BURTON:

With you - is that your mother who is with you? Just press the red button
thank you.

MR BUKULA

It is my mother’s friend - sorry.

MS BURTON

Thank you Mr Bukula. I know it suddenly makes an amplified noise. Welcome
madam, thank you for coming today. Please Mr Bukula will you stand to
take the oath.



ELIAS BUKULA				Duly sworn states



MS BURTON:

Thank you - please sit down. Advocate Potgieter will facilitate your
testimony.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Chairperson. Mr Bukula good afternoon again - welcome and thank
you for coming. Your story will be the last one that we will hear for
today, but I assure you that we are listening to it as intently as all of
the other cases.

You want to tell us about what happened after you were arrested on the
13th of April 1985. Now before you tell us about that, just tell us what
you were doing at that stage, little bit about yourself in 1985. What you
were involved in, were you politically active and so on. I hand over to
you.

MR BUKULA

I was not a member of any organisation. I was arrested in the township. I
was visiting my mother’s friend. It was in the evening. Police came to
the house. It - they entered the house and they arrested me. There was a
Coloured man with me. The owner of the house was Coloured - they did not
arrest him, they arrested me.

I was beaten with the sjambok. The stuffed me in a mello-yellow, I
pretended that I had died. They were burning me with cigarette butts, I
have wounds on my head still. I do not have all my teeth - my set was
affected - they kicked me in the mouth.

They carried on beating me up, I decided to run away from the police,
they caught me again around the City Hall and they put me back into jail.
When I asked why I had been arrested, they said it was because I was
publicly violent and an added crime of running away from the police.

One night - some of the nights we would be taken from our cells to a
place we do not know and we would be beaten up and they’d take us back to
our cells. I then stayed in jail for three months for having run away
from them and an added three years for public violence.

My ear is affected - my one ear is deaf, because they slapped me on the
ear. I was working then, but now I am not working. I have a child, the
child stays at home.

ADV POTGIETER:

[inaudible]

MR BUKULA

I stay on my own.

ADV POTGIETER:

And the child lives with you.

MR BUKULA

This child lives with my parents.

ADV POTGIETER:

And do your parents, do your parents [indistinct]

MR BUKULA

When they were still alive - they are now dead. They supported my child.
Now and again I help.

ADV POTGIETER:

[inaudible]

MR BUKULA

This child stays with my brother’s wife - The child stays with my
brother’s wife at home. The child is in standard three.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] unemployed at present, but you were working before you were
arrested.

MR BUKULA

Before I was arrested I was working at Metro, but now I am unemployed.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] position at Metro because of your arrest and sentence.



MR BUKULA

Yes, it is so.

ADV POTGIETER:

You’ve been unable to find another job since having been through this
experience.

MR BUKULA

No, I have not been able to get another job.

ADV POTGIETER:

What [indistinct] present.

MR BUKULA

I live in poverty. When I have money, I just buy myself bread and I eat.
I live in poverty. It is not the same as before I was arrested. Things
are different.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] a permanent job and a regular income.

MR BUKULA

I had a regular income.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now you were saying that you were not politically involved, politically
active. Were you the only person that was arrested in that particular
incident at this house where you were.



MR BUKULA

Yes, I was the only one who was arrested even though I was not a member
of a political organisation.

ADV POTGIETER:

The incidents that they questioned you about. Did you have any knowledge
about that.

MR BUKULA

I had no idea.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] admit that you have been involved in these incidents or
what. What were they trying to get you to do.

MR BUKULA

They said that I must admit that I had thrown stones.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you do that eventually or what. What happened?

MR BUKULA

I never admitted to any crime.

ADV POTGIETER:

Who were the police that were involved in your arrest and in your these
assaults that you have been talking about.





MR BUKULA

It was Barnard, Snyman, Zepe and others that I have forgotten. They are
no longer in De Aar.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] at that stage in 1985 when this incident happened.

MR BUKULA

Yes, all of them were from here.

ADV POTGIETER:

Subsequently is that correct?

MR BUKULA

There were thirteen of us. We were all accused. They did not take us to
court immediately, but when we did go they kept on postponing the case
for an entire year. And the year after that, that is when it proceeded.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now when the case was postponed for a year - were you on bail or were you
in custody?

MR BUKULA

I was out on bail sir.

ADV POTGIETER:

You have been assaulted as you indicated. You must have had injuries as a
result of those assaults.



MR BUKULA

I don’t know what they used to hit me on the head. But I was terribly
injured, I get headaches now and again. I had one wound on my head, my
head was injured. My knee is injured, it still troubles me.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now were you taken to see a doctor.

MR BUKULA

They never took me to any doctor.

ADV POTGIETER:

So you didn’t receive any medical treatment for those injuries that you
sustained.

MR BUKULA

I never received any treatment.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you were convicted it seems, found guilty of public violence
eventually.

MR BUKULA

It is so.

ADV POTGIETER:

What sort of evidence did the police manage to bring in against you at
the trial.





MR BUKULA

They said that I had I was arrested for public violence for having thrown
a stone.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is it the police themselves or is it members of the community or what
happened.

MR BUKULA

It is the same police that arrested me that gave evidence against me. I
had my own witness. The lady in whose house I was in, but her evidence
did not help at all. I was forced to be jailed.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] evidence.

MR BUKULA

Yes, I did.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] accepted the evidence of the police and rejected your
evidence and the evidence of your witness.

MR BUKULA

It is so.

ADV POTGIETER:

Now you must have had some visible injuries, because according to the
report of our investigators who looked into your matter and visited the
police station here in De Aar, they noticed that in the police records
there is an entry relating to a report by constable Barnard, one of the
persons that you referred to earlier stating that you were manhandled
when you were trying to escape. So it seems as if Barnard was trying to
give an explanation for your injuries and he said that you got those
injuries when you tried to escape. What is you comment on that?

MR BUKULA

It’s painful for me to hear that. I am now in poverty. I cannot feed
myself, I cannot feed my child. My health is at stake.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] that what happened was that you actually ran away because of
the assaults that were perpetrated on you.

MR BUKULA

Yes, they were beating me up and I thought that the only thing that would
save my life was to run away. After they caught me again, they did not
beat me up again, so it actually did help that I’d run away.

ADV POTGIETER:

Mr Bukula thank you very much for you testimony.

MR BUKULA

Thank you sir.





MS SEROKE:

Mr Bukula you say that you your ear has been injured such that it is
deaf. Is there a doctor that you go to that gives you treatment for your
ear.

MR BUKULA

No, there’s none.

MS SEROKE:

Is it because you have given up or is it because you cannot afford.

MR BUKULA

I cannot afford a doctor.

MS SEROKE:

How many teeth did you loose.

MR BUKULA

Five.

MS SEROKE:

You could not help yourself by getting dentures.

MR BUKULA

I do not have money for false teeth.

MS SEROKE:

Do you enjoy walking around with no teeth?

MR BUKULA

No, I do not enjoy it.



MS SEROKE:

What is your request in connection with your ear and your teeth.

MR BUKULA

I need help so that I can go to the doctor. So that I can get dentures.

Mostly I need help, my son needs to be educated. When my parents were
still alive, they would take my child to school. Now they no longer,
therefore I need help.

MS SEROKE:

I trust that you are aware that as the Truth Commission we cannot promise
that we will give you money to educate to your child, to get dentures and
to get you a doctor to help you, but we do have the authority to
recommend to the government to help you. That is what we are going to ask
the government to do for you. Sir, it is not something that will happen
immediately, but we will try.

MR BUKULA

Thank you very much.

MS BURTON:

[indistinct] just yet. I just want to thank you very much for coming and
to hope that you will feel better as a result of having talked to us
about the very bad experience that you had when you were in detention and
we ask that people should treat those experiences with respect and
understanding. As Ms Seroke said we are not in a position to be able to
say that we can solve your problems, but there are things that we can do
to recommend that you get proper treatment and we will do our best in
that regard. We thank you very much indeed for coming here today. You can
leave the stage now.

MR BUKULA

We thank you very much.



