TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 4 - 25 APRIL 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00508

VICTIM:				LUCAS BABA SIKWEPERE

VIOLATION:			TORTURE

TESTIMONIES FROM:	LUCAS BABA SIKWEPERE

					NONTOBEKO GALLERY FENI



DR BORAINE:

The next witness that the Commission will hear is Lucas Baba Sikwepere
and I’d be grateful if he would come please. I understand that also
Nontobeko Gallery Feni will be accompanying Lucas. Mr Sikwepere can you
hear me.

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

Can you hear the [indistinct] as well.

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes I can.

DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much. We would like to welcome you very warmly to the
Commission. You have been sitting for a long time listening to others and
now you have an opportunity to speak for yourself about some very
dreadful actions that were taken against you which live with you today. I
have to ask you to take the oath, if you prefer to remain seated, that’s
not a problem.



LUCAS BABA SIKWEPERE		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you, you may be seated please. Mr Sikwepere it’s difficult to even
begin to understand what your experiences have been and perhaps the
wisest for all of us is to allow you to talk for yourself about the
injuries you’ve sustained and the torture that you’ve endured.

	And Ms Pumla Gobodo one of our Commissioners will take up from me now to
assist you to tell your own story, thank you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you Chairman - Chairperson. Chairperson Dr Boraine has introduced
to you and presented Lucas Baba Sikwepere.

Baba is going to present to us what he says is the work of the man who
came to be known as the Rambo of the Peninsula. The police officer who is
known by the name of Barnard. Baba is going to tell us that the last time
he saw with his eyes, was when he turned to look at Barnard who then blew
his eyes and vision to non existence.

	Barnard has been mentioned in this room by a number of witnesses. And if
we as the Human Rights Violations Committee find that Barnard was indeed
responsible for all the atrocities that are mentioned here for all the
killings, the destruction of people’s lives - the [indistinct]

	The total incomplete dehumanisation of people if we find that this is
true. There are two questions that are pressing for me, the first one is
wasn’t there any policeman in the force in the Peninsula who could stop
him in his tracks, and was our legal system so hopeless that he couldn’t
be brought to a Court of Law with justice.

And speaking of a Court of Law, I am reminded of what a witness here on
Tuesday said, Mr Juqu, Mr Juqu said in those years the Law allowed them
to do whatever they wanted to do to us. And he further said that if you
were a person in authority and I will translate what he said literally.

If you are a person in authority, you had the right to lie in a Court of
Law. And the South African idea of a Court of Law takes us back to the
1960’s, and I remember what was said by Judge De Wet in the Rivonia trial
in his closing remarks.

He first of all dismissed the expert testimony of Dr Allan Patten and
said that he was in no way convinced that President Mandela and Others
were trying to improve the lives of the oppressed in apartheid South
Africa. JP de Wet also said that just as a way of explaining to everybody
what the Courts then were doing, he said that the function of the Courts
is to enforce the Laws of the States. And to enforce law and order.

Now it is our function here as the Human Rights Violations Committee to
try and establish what Barnard’s idea of the enforcement of law and order
was. And to establish the extends and nature of that enforcement of law
and order.

Baba, you can take off your earphones. Good morning, I am just going to
explain to you how this house is arranged. If you face towards your
right, that is now the whole house, you are now seated on the platform,
people in this house are approximately 200 to 250. You are now seated on
the platform. And our small tables are arranged as a horse shoe. Right in
the middle of the horse shoe is Bishop Tutu, next to him is Dr Boraine, I
am right at the extreme end of this horse shoe. I am seated directly
across you, we are facing each other. We are now going to start to talk
to each other, Baba.

Could you please tell us Baba what happened on that day of this incident,
could you please explain to us.

MR SIKWEPERE

On this particular day it was on - in the morning we were told that the
previous night that we shouldn’t sleep at night, because we were going to
be attacked. Now the community at large was told by a loudspeaker to stay
outside the whole night - that night. Now the following day I left and I
went to find out if my house was still there. Before an hour was over
while I was still at - in my house, I - I heard that we were called.

And I heard that we are now being attacked. I ran, we were - I went
through the Terminus Road. Now that was where we were suppose to collect
each other. Now that place was between Crossroads and KTC. While we were
still there, a van approached - it was a white van and it was driven by
Barnard. When he - after he had just passed, he asked us to all disperse
within five minutes. People asked how can - how can he ask us to - to
disperse because we are not here to do any harm. Only people who are
suppose too - who are here to burn the place should be dispersed.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Please don’t speak fast of the interpreter’s sake, do you think you can
do that?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes I can. Now when the communities asked how can he ask us to disperse
because this is just a small meeting, we were just 20 to 25. We were here
to elect people and we were just asking how can he ask this of us. We
elected 3 people, one of them was Vulelo Schoto we use to call him
Bullet, I can’t remember the name of the third one. I was the fourth one,
but I wasn’t elected.

I wanted to find out what was the response from this white man. That time
he had already turned towards Nyanga East. On his way back from Nyanga
East he was facing KTC now. Now that’s when now we were told now this
three elected men must go and represent us. When I saw that the van now
was stationary, I went to it. They checked if the person driving the car
was the one that they were looking for - they found that no it wasn’t him.

I was just standing for two minutes next to the window, I found out now -
now this white man opened the door and withdraw his gun. Now I wanted to
find out what is the story going on, on the other side of this car. I
tried to peep and I was looking straight into him, straight to him. When
- while I was still looking at him, these people asked him, how can you
ask us to disperse, and yet we have no aims to do harm to anyone. We are
here to stop whoever who is trying to burn this place up.

This white man said this in Afrikaans - you are going to get eventually
what you looking for. And I am going to shoot you. I was shocked at what
this white man said to him, to me. He said in Afrikaans, I am going to
get you. Now I wanted to find out why is he talking to me like this. And
I was just trying to find out was he referring to me by all these, and
one - one of the men behind me ran. I saw this people surrounding this
van - I was now wondering when - where do these people come from
surrounding this van, all of a sudden.

After I saw this running men, now I didn’t even care about this one, I
was talking to. After that I heard a loud noise, it sounded like a stone
hitting a sink, now it - it ended up looking now I was going to be
included among these people surrounding this van. But I decided not to
run, I decided to walk. Because I knew that if you run, you were going to
be shot, so I decided let me just walk into a safe place where I can just
start now running. But during that time shootings were going on, there
were two white men in this car.

Barnard was not driving at that time, now when I - when I arrived at the
place when I thought now I am safe, I felt something hitting my cheek. I
couldn’t go any further, I stayed right there only to find out I had been
hidden by a corner of a house. I felt my eyes itching, I was just itching
my eyes, I was scratching my eyes I wasn’t quite sure what happened to my
eyes at that particular time. I felt somebody stepping on my right
shoulder.

And saying I thought this dog has died already. I felt both my eyes - I
was just waiting that these people are going to take me to a prison end
of Tape 19, side A … during that whole time - after saying is this man
dead or not, some people picked me up. Only to find out they were taking
me into a private car, now that’s the car that took me to the hospital.
That’s where I spend a month, after I came back I still stayed in misery.

The same white man still tried to torture me, another night this white
man came again. They came to fetch me and I was staying that time with my
girl friend. When I got to where the Casspir was going, it was Nyanga
East at the police station. That’s where they really beat me up so much
that they said I was the organiser of all these riots.

I was worried, tried to think where were they taking me, they emphasized
all - they were concentrating on me, most of the time, they took me to
the cemetery. I was with Lulama Magoje and she was the one who was
holding my hand. And they pushed me into a hole and they were - I was
told to tell the truth even if you could die here now, nobody would know
anything.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Truth about what Baba?

MR SIKWEPERE

They were asking us about arms, they were telling - they were saying I am
the boss. Lulama who was next to me - was the one who was always with me.
I couldn’t tell them anything because I didn’t even know what they were
asking me. After 15 to 20 minutes, they pulled me out - I don’t know - I
don’t know how Lulama got out of this grave. They took us into - into the
Culemborg police station. There we were taken one by one, they would just
take the one’s they wanted and take them home. When we got to Nyanga East
we were told to go - to go back home. I stayed at home for two to three
months. And these people came back again.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Who are these people Baba?

MR SIKWEPERE

These people are white policemen, I cannot tell their names now, and I
cannot tell who they were because I was already blind this time.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Were they speaking English or Xhosa?





MR SIKWEPERE

They were speaking English but there was only one Xhosa speaking person,
it was the interpreter. After that they took me to Guguletu police
station. We stayed there with other detained people. One of them was Baba
- not Baba only to find that they were not looking for Baba they were
looking for Baba.

They told me that I - they were going to put me away until I tell the
truth. Because they believe that I am the one who knows everything. They
thought that I had the guns and the hand grenades. I told them I don’t
know anything about those, I was shocked when they told me they were
going to throw me into Allandale.

I knew that this is something, this was their usual practice. Because I
was very scared I told them a certain statement which I cannot even tell
now to you because I was too scared. I was just telling then that people
were burning certain places and they were murdering certain people, I
cannot tell you why I said that, because I - I was so confused. KTC place
was the place where people use to be killed.

Now so I thought I was going to go to Kwa Langa where I use to stay.
That’s where I will end this - my story.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you Baba. We can see that this is still painful for you, when you
have to talk about these things, we can see that it is painful for you.
Baba because at the end of all - all these proceedings, I would like to
ask you a few questions to have clarity. Firstly you said something that
had happened at KTC where Barnard was, is that.

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Secondly after three months when you were taken again, you were taken to
the cemetery at NY5 is that so? That’s where they put you in one of the
graves, is that so?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

What did they do to you when you were at the cemetery, what did
[intervention]

MR SIKWEPERE

While we were at the cemetery, these people told me that while you are in
this grave you can die in here and nobody will know where you are. They
told - they asked me to tell the truth and I told them that I don’t know
anything. We were not beaten up while we were in the cemetery. While they
were talking to me, I was already in this grave. I was with Lulama Magoje
in this open grave.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

This truth were they - is that the truth that they were asking you that
you knew everything about the arms?



MR SIKWEPERE

That’s right. They wanted people called that time Rasta. Because it
looked like at that time it - it was Rasta who knew where the arms were.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you Baba I am going to let you go now, but I am going to hand you
over to our Chairperson, maybe some of my Colleagues have questions as
well. Do you think you can answer some of their questions?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes I will.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Anyone with a question, Dumisa Ntsebeza.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Baba there was something that wasn’t clear. It wasn’t quite clear in
English because you were speaking too fast. Now I am going to ask you
just to ensure that is it what really said, is only one - just one part
of it. After you have been blinded by being shot, then you got out of the
hospital, the police tortured you since 1987, is that so?

MR SIKWEPERE

[No audible answer]

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Did they interrogate you until 1987, is that so?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes that’s so.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

And you were already blind at that time?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes, that’s so.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

And what they emphasized on was because you were blind, you were the one
keeping the arms, you were the one hiding the arms. No because the police
will not suspect you, now they were going to make you show them the arms,
is that so?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes that is so.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Wendy Orr.

DR ORR:

I am going to ask you a few questions, it may be that - that you did
answer them, but I didn’t understand the translation very well. You were
speaking about the night when you were shot and you said there were
people with the police who you called Inkatha is that right?





MR SIKWEPERE

Yes that’s so.

DR ORR:

Do you mean by this members of the Inkatha Freedom Party of was it
another group of people?

MR SIKWEPERE

Those people were called Inkatha because they were speaking Zulu. And
they came to collect everybody who were - who were speaking Afrikaans at
that time, wanted to speak Afrikaans, that’s how now they were called
Inkatha because of their language.

DR ORR:

Thank you, and just one other question, before you were shot, who did you
see standing there pointing a gun at you?

MR SIKWEPERE

The person I was looking at, pointing a gun at me, I saw this gun
pointing at me and I heard the shot against my cheek and it was Barnard,
he was standing next to his car.

DR ORR:

Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON:

Dr Boraine.

DR BORAINE:

I want to ask you two questions. The first is when you recovered but -
from your injuries but you were blind, was there any Court case or
anything that happened after that?

MR SIKWEPERE

I don’t quite understand the question.

DR BORAINE:

Was there - let me try and rephrase that. You were shot and you were
blind was their any investigation about - against the man who shot you at
all?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes there was an investigation, I was at the hospital my face was
swollen. There were people coming from legal aid from Town. I didn’t go
to their offices, they came to me. Because they couldn’t come to the
township easily. When they asked me how everything was going - my case, I
told them no, there was no progress in my case.

DR BORAINE:

And what happened after that?

MR SIKWEPERE

Like I said my lawyer told me to - to resign because my case now wasn’t
going anywhere.

DR BORAINE:

The last question that I have is, that was in 1985 is that right when you
were shot?



MR SIKWEPERE

[No audible answer]

DR BORAINE:

Was that in 1985 when you were shot?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes it was the last day of the year.

DR BORAINE:

And in 1987 you were tortured again.

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes very much.

DR BORAINE:

Is that at the Guguletu police station?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes it was at Guguletu police station.

DR BORAINE:

What did they do to you?

MR SIKWEPERE

I wasn’t beaten at the Guguletu police station, I was taken away from my
families, where nobody could visit me. Now that was the time when I
actually did what they wanted me to do. There was a statement, a fifteen
page long statement that was made by this policeman, then after that’s
the only time I was released.





DR BORAINE:

[indistinct] you before you made the statement.

MR SIKWEPERE

Before I gave this statement, they threatened me I wasn’t beaten up, I
was threatened very much, the last time I was beaten up, it was at the
police station where I was - a sack was put on over my face. 	

DR BORAINE:

That’s all I want to know, thank you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you, take off your earphones, Baba I would like to tell the people
of the Commission because of the question that was asked by one of our
ladies about the Inkatha. I want to tell them that in the townships where
there are Xhosa speaking people, during these riots and all the violence,
if there were other people who were not Xhosa speaking there, and they
were speaking Zulu, those people living in that area, would conclude that
those are Inkatha people.

Now because these are seen as enemies, so now they would be called
Inkatha. Now when it come to the Cape Town townships, those people called
wit doeke I am sure this sister next to you is going to bear witness to
this. You use to call them amabatcha just because they are Xhosa dialect
wasn’t the same as the - as yours here in Cape Town. It’s closer to Zulu,
that is now how they were now referred to as Inkatha. I just wanted to
give that report, so that my colleagues here can understand that. Baba do
you have any bullets in you as we speak.

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes there are several of them. Some are here in my neck. Now on my face
you can really see them, but my face feels quite rough, it feels like
rough salt. I usually have terrible headaches.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you Baba.

CHAIRPERSON:

We will come again after lunch.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you Chairperson.

DR BORAINE:

I have to swear her in.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Again?

DR BORAINE:

She hasn’t been sworn in. Ms Feni can you hear me.

MS FENI:

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

Can you hear the translation?

MS FENI

Yes I can hear it well.



DR BORAINE:

Oh! that’s great, it’s really nice welcoming you here this afternoon I am
sorry we had to interrupt and keep you waiting for the lunch break, but
we very glad to see you now. I have to ask you to take the oath, so would
you please stand.



NONTOBEKO GALLERY FENI		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much, you may be seated, Pumla thank you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you Chairperson, Ms Feni we have already asked for your forgiveness
for making you walk up and down. We’ll start working Nontobeko you can
take your earphones off now. Baba has already told us what had happened
that day, the last day of 1985. Please give us a mental picture of what
you saw and the reason why Barnard went to your place, please tell us
mamma.

MS FENI

We heard a loudspeaker - when we went to the tar road, responding to the
loudspeaker’s call, we found out that it was Barnard who was calling us.
He was in the car, he was with another man, the name of that man with
Barnard was Swart.





MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Is he a policeman?

MS FENI

Yes he is a policeman.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Was Swart driving?

MS FENI

No Barnard was driving, Swart was next to Barnard, he usually - he is
usually with Barnard all the time. When he called us there were men
waiting in the yard among our shacks. And that was the place where the
boers use to patrol.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Who were Pluto’s?

MS FENI

The Sotho - Sotho speaking men from Nyanga East who usually wear
blankets, were the one’s we called Pluto’s. They use to stay at Nyanga
East next to terminus. Barnard was from those people, while he was with
us now, he told us come out comrades, you are cowards, are you afraid of
these people. Ja and you know - as you know when somebody is calling you
a coward, you don’t want to be called a coward, you come out.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Who are these people were they wit doeke?



MS FENI

Yes they were. So we all went, I was - I had just finished washing the
napkins, napkins, Barnard asked are you afraid of these people comrades -
comrades you are cowards. You are illiterate, are you afraid of
illiterate people. A few men approached just near us, they were from New
Crossroads. They came from a certain corner which was just near us, we
saw now these men - I could see this people because they were right in
front of me. There were others right in front of us, and I saw these men,
when I saw it’s these people, they were here already.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Which are those men, are they the wit doek?

MS FENI

Yes they were, wit doek. When they arrived Barnard started to shoot at
them he said come are you afraid you comrades, come. Now he started
shooting, shooting all over when I looked next to me one of the men fell
next to me. And it was Baba, I said Baba get up, oh! they have finished
me off. That time I had a child on my back, he was a year or so. And then
a taxi arrived and took us to Conrad, and that is the end of the story.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you ma, I just wanted to find out before you went to Conrad, let’s
just go back a little. Why did Barnard come to you, exactly? Because it
looks like you saying Barnard was trying to make you fight with the wit
doek people from this other side.

MS FENI

That was Barnard’s work, he is been in trying to make everybody fight, he
was inciting people to fight.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

He said you are cowards, are you afraid of this [indistinct] - illiterate
people come.

MS FENI

Yes that’s what he use to do, he use to incite people to fight. He was a
frightful and he wasn’t afraid to come and just walk around us.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you mamma. I am going to ask our Chairman to have just a last
question to Baba, thank you.

There was something Baba that wasn’t clear when you made your statement
about your torture. The years and the months were not really clear. We
understand this has been a long time sometimes you won’t be able to
remember the correct dates, but just tell us you went to the hospital and
you stayed there for three months and then you came out. Now after you
were discharged from hospital, you were taken to Nyanga East is that so?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes, I was taken to - to a building at Nyanga East which was used as a
bar, now that building was converted from being a bar and used by people
called wit doeke. Now those people now were called blou doek, now that
was the - now that was the place where people were taken by the people
wearing blue, to be tortured. Now that was the police station I use to
beaten up that’s where they put a sack over me. They use to pour water
over me so that I can be - I can be suffocated.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Could you please tell us this Bishop Tutu sack you talking about.

MR SIKWEPERE

They would put a doek a sack over me and then I would feel this water
running through me. Now but when they put the sack over, there was no
water, that’s the kind of sack I am talking about, and there were no
holes in it, I couldn’t breath, and I was on the ground and there were
stepping over me.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Now how much time lapsed before you went back to Guguletu? Before and
again they tortured you.

MR SIKWEPERE

It wasn’t a long time after that. They tortured me in this two police
stations after torturing me, they will just tell me to go home. Now the
torture I am talking about was in - was happening in the police stations.
I was released from Nyanga East police station after three months, and
they would torture me again, and then Jerry and Mr Austin came to fetch
me again to the police station to torture me again.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

So the picture you giving us now here is that they kept coming at - to
you - to throw you in a deserted place to throw you into cemeteries, so
that you can be tortured in those places?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes, usually I have a fat body, but after that I lost all my body, now I
am thin as you can see me now.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Now for the last time, how do you feel about coming here to tell us your
story?

MR SIKWEPERE

I feel what - what has brought my sight back, my eyesight back is to come
back here, and tell the story. But I feel what has been making me sick
all the time is the fact that I couldn’t tell my story. But now I - it
feels like I got my sight back by coming here and tell you the story.

CHAIRPERSON:

Is there - any Dr Orr.

DR ORR:

I’d like to ask Ms Feni a question if she can put on her earphones. Ms
Feni on the night or on the day that Baba was shot, were you also injured?

MS FENI

Yes I was injured, even my child was injured as well, there she is.

CHAIRPERSON:

Mary Burton.

MS BURTON:

Thank you, I would like to ask a question which either Mr Sikwepere or Ms
Feni may be able to answer. There was mentioned at the time when you were
near the van before Mr Sikwepere was shot, that there were other people
there, one of them I think was Mbulelo who was also known as Bullet, I
think his name was Mbulelo Sikoto is that right?

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes that’s correct.

MS BURTON:

Can you remember the names of any other people who were there at the time?

MR SIKWEPERE

If I could see them yes I will recognise them end of Tape 19, side B …

MS BURTON:

We thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Any other, thank you very much to both of you for coming to us and
telling your story, thank you very much. Is there anything that you
wanted to add.

MR SIKWEPERE

Yes there is. I would like to explain something to the Commission that
the role of the struggle by the comrades, I was not involved in those, I
forgot to tell you this. I was just an ordinary worker, and I was - I was
not involved in - in the struggle. My involvement now with the struggle
only came when I was already injured, now that’s the time I started to
get involved with the struggle of the freedom. Before I wasn’t involved.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you, there is another question from the research section.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER:

Baba what is your wish that the Commission can do for you to help? What
is your wish Baba?

MR SIKWEPERE

I wish that the Commission can take care of the future of my children.
Which is something that I cannot do at the moment. They are still going
to school but they don’t even have enough clothes to go to school,
they’re struggling, their children is not working - their mother is not
working and I am only depending on the pension. That’s the only thing
that I wish for.

UNKNOWN COMMISSIONER

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you very much.







