TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 23 APRIL 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00707

VICTIM:				SONNY BOY ZANTSI [brother]

VIOLATION:			SHOT AND KILLED

TESTIMONIES FROM:	NOMVUYO PRISCILLA ZANTSI

					MS QUAY



DR BORAINE:

Good afternoon Ms Zantsi.

MS ZANTSI:

Good afternoon.

DR BORAINE:

Can you hear me all right?

MS ZANTSI:

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

Fine, I want to welcome you on behalf of the Commission and thank you
very much indeed for coming. I notice you have someone with you, is she
also going to testify, or is she just with you?



MS ZANTSI:

No testify.

DR BORAINE:

Okay, we’ll come back to her in a moment, but we will start with you. And
if you would please stand for the taking of the oath.



NOMVUYO PRISCILA ZANTSI		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much, will you be seated please. Ms Zantsi you have come
to tell us about your brother Sonny Boy.

MS ZANTSI

Yes - ja.

DR BORAINE:

Were you here this morning?

MS ZANTSI

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

You were, so you know that you are in the company of many people who have
suffered over the last years. You have come to tell us how he died and
it’s a very sad story, it’s not easy for you to tell that story and to
assist you and to help you Dumisa Ntsebeza will be asking you some
questions. Is that all right?



MS ZANTSI

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Thank you Dr Boraine, before we begin and I will be speaking to Ms Zantsi
in Xhosa I would like her to settle in that chair, together with her
witness whilst I try and make some opening remarks which I think it is
[indistinct] for me to make.

Mr Chairman let’s we forget whenever in this testimonies we will recall
the atrocities of the past. We must always put them in proper context. In
particular when we talk of 1976, especially against the backdrop of what
was still happening in this country, ten years later as we heard in
relation to the Guguletu 7.

But in particular when we talk about 1976, hence we forget, we must
always remember that the violence that indulge the country, had been
triggered by an unbelievably [indistinct] in particular by that notorious
Minister of State MC Botha who was so determined in ramming down the
throats of African children, a ghetto education that was to be imparted
to them in a language that they had begun to hate, because they
identified it with the oppressive apartheid regime.

So in transient was MC Botha that this language will be used as a medium
of instruction. That even when he was advised that implementation of this
programme would be resisted, he and his Government were not prepared to
back down. Now Mr Chairman the cost was high, very high indeed.

The now end of Tape 8, side B … of many young people who died in 1976. It
was a remarkable phenomenon it still is. That such a viscous State
machinery was unleashed with such ferocious tenancy on school children.
Life ammunition was used systematically as you will hear in this
particular story, relentlessly by well trained police against children,
who’s mostly their weapons were stones.

Never in the history of the world Mr Chairman has so much State sponsored
legal violence been so ruthlessly meted out against defenceless children,
and such a well trained killing machine. All in defence of illegacy the
system that the whole world had condemned as a crime against humanity in
defence of apartheid as you will hear from this story.

The Security Forces in this country, waist a war against children in
which they were not prepared to take [indistinct]. Sonny Boy Zantsi is
one such victim who the Security Forces had to kill rather than take
prisoner. He was only 15 years old.

Ms Zantsi I am no going to speak Xhosa, I would ask you in two or three
minutes - you don’t have to hurry, just please tell us who was - who was
Sonny Boy’s parents, what was he to you, when he was shot. Just please
tell us what kind of a child he was, what kind of things that he liked,
and briefly tell us and on this day when you heard this, what did you do?

MS ZANTSI

I am Nomvuyo Priscila Zantsi.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

You must please come forward.

MS ZANTSI

My name is Nomvuyo Priscila Zantsi I was born here in Cape Town. Sonny
Boy is my brother. His parents are Wilson Zantsi and his mother is Rosy
Zantsi.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When this happened was his mother alive?

MS ZANTSI

Sonny Boy’s mother died in September. That is now my mother.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

In other words while this happened were you still mourning your mother’s
death.

MS ZANTSI

No we were mourning Sonny Boy’s death in 1976.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

I would like us to focus on this particular day when all this happened.
When did you hear this and how did you hear it - or let’s just start like
this. On this morning, when did you see Sonny Boy?







MS ZANTSI

The last time I saw Sonny Boy it was 1976 on the 16th of September, it
was on a Thursday. He was in the house the whole day, there was just
chaos on the 16th.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When you say it was chaos what was actually happening?

MS ZANTSI

There was a riot, a riot by students, he wasn’t at school that day,
although he was suppose to be at school. We were watching the vans
passing by and we were running away from tear gasses.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What kind of vans are these?

MS ZANTSI

These vans are - were police vans. On this day, the 16th he was with us
in the house, but on that day he left in the afternoon around five. But
we didn’t ask him where he was going. While we were still sitting in the
house, we saw a group of people. They told us that Sonny Boy has been
shot at 3A.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

At 3A, where do you live, in which NY do you live?

MS ZANTSI

I live at NY50.





ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is that near NY3?

MS ZANTSI

Yes it is, when you count from where I live, you can count three houses
from where I live where he was shot.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

In other words he was shot very near where he lived?

MS ZANTSI

Yes he did.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When you heard this, what did you do?

MS ZANTSI

When I heard this, I was very disturbed, I was the first one to go there,
when I got there the place was full of boers with guns, I just went
through them I was shouting for his name Sonny Boy - Sonny Boy I heard a
certain voice somebody just said look in the dirty box, look in the
thrash bin. Look into the big van of the police.

When I got there I saw him in this big van. He was lying on the
[indistinct] position. I could see, I could identify his pants and the
other clothes that he had, he was wearing a pair of brown a maroon
corduroy pants. I went there, I went straight into this big police van I
shouted his name, he didn’t answer back.





ADV NTSEBEZA:

Were you sure that he was still alive at that time or are you not sure
about this?

MS ZANTSI

No I wasn’t sure - I wasn’t sure I he was still alive. I thought if he
was just asleep, or he was in pain, but he didn’t answer back.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What happened after that?

MS ZANTSI

After that there were boers standing next to this police van.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Did you understand that, it means why did they throw the stones - did
they tell you that there was an accident?

MS ZANTSI

No they didn’t tell me anything.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

They just told you that [intervention]

MS ZANTSI

No they didn’t do anything, but somebody just said these kids were
throwing stones and this was - was standing next to this big van with
guns. I was just next to the door of the - of the truck. I was shouting
his name and was looking at him.





ADV NTSEBEZA:

Where there stones next to where this van was?

MS ZANTSI

No there were no stones.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

How many police were there?

MS ZANTSI

They were countless, they were over 20 there were some standing next to a
corner. Some was surrounding this big van -some was standing next to the
gate, next to the houses.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

How many kids were there in the van?

MS ZANTSI

There were two, Sonny Boy was one of them.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Were these men armed?

MS ZANTSI

Yes they were, they were armed with rifles.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Lets just assume that Sonny Boy and his friends were throwing stones, as
you know the situation, Sonny Boy was 15 years, how old was the other
one? How old - how old was this other one?

MS ZANTSI

Sonny Boy was 15 years.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

No this other one - this other one with Sonny Boy.

MS ZANTSI

This other one, it looks like he was 19 years.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When you say - when you saw all these armed - heavily armed policemen,
did you think that - when they were throwing stones by these kids and did
you think that they were going to shoot back?

MS ZANTSI

I didn’t expect them to shoot as much as they did. What I expected was
they should have just arrested them, just put them into the police
station and be asked questions in stead of that of being shot.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Going back to where you - where you said you heard that the children
threw stones, what else do you remember?

MS ZANTSI

When one of these policeman asked why did the children throw stones, I
didn’t answer. I didn’t - I didn’t even know what happened after that. I
just turned around and I - apparently I went home I cant remember if I
did, the process of actually going home.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

You think that you fainted?

MS ZANTSI

Yes I think so.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now let’s come back now, let’s come back to the story by - as told by
Regina. According to what you have heard, this particular policeman which
actually killed this man, when did you hear this?

MS ZANTSI

I heard that afterwards, the same day - the same day that Sonny Boy was
killed people came in for example our next-door neighbour, one of the
policeman, one of the boers with this scarf that he had around his neck,
he was driving a red Valiant car. That’s how - that’s how this was.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What did the people say to you?

MS ZANTSI

Where in the house?

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Yes.

MS ZANTSI

They just told us - they were telling my father we were put into the room
then we just heard everybody crying.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is that when you heard that Sonny Boy had died?

MS ZANTSI

No we didn’t hear this immediately, my father left on that day, he went
to the police station. And when he asked about him at the police station
nobody knew anything about Sonny Boy he was told Sonny Boy is not here.
And then he came back to tell us no he couldn’t find Sonny Boy. So went
to Salt River that’s where he found Sonny Boy. He came back with his
clothes, he was already dead by that time. So my father came back with
Sonny Boy’s clothes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

About the witness of his clothes, what is the report about that?

MS ZANTSI

The reports about this is they were shot next to a bathroom that’s how
his clothes got wet.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

And this house that they were shot in is it Ms Quay’s house?

MS ZANTSI

Yes it is.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

The one you asked to tell this story about Sonny Boy’s shooting?

MS ZANTSI

Yes it is.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

We will talk to her later then she will tell us how did this happen. Now
about you, Is there any Court that you went to regarding the death of
your son - of Sonny Boy, somebody must have a report about this.



MS ZANTSI

My father told us that he went to beg, there were many from Wynberg he
came with this - they said at Wynberg there is nothing they can do, there
is no case really because they threw stones at the police.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

In other words - in other words nobody was at - nobody was put into trial
because of Sonny Boy’s death, because the police were doing their job.

MS ZANTSI

We were told that nobody is at fault.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is there any letter that you or your father got from the President of
South Africa or any Minister something that showed how the Government
regretted this whole shooting.

MS ZANTSI

No we didn’t get any letter, where did you get letters that show - that
show the regret. The only letters that we got were postcards from - from
abroad. They were not even written in English, they were written in a
language that we couldn’t understand. But we could see that these were
postcards that were showing sympathetic emotions.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Did any police come to you or anything coming from the police just to
inform you that your son has died in this way?



MS ZANTSI

No there were no police who came.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

No you talked about your father, how did your father feel about this. How
did it affect him?

MS ZANTSI

This hurt him a lot, such that after a while he wasn’t well.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When you say this, you actually show it with your hand, what does that
mean?

MS ZANTSI

It means that he - he later was very much affected mentally even now in
September when my mother was just passed away he got worst.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Do you think that he - this revived his illness because he was still
mourning your brother’s death? Don’t worry Nomvuyo these things scare me
too, but we have to talk about them so that the world can know about
them, even though they still hurt. Try to endure, can we go on?

MS ZANTSI

Yes we can.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

So do you think your father was hurt about this because while he was
still mourning over his son’s death his mother died, especially as Sonny
Boy. What kind of a person was he?

MS ZANTSI

Sonny Boy was very good, he was the last born. Sonny Boy was even very
good at school, he went to church a lot, he was training karate, he was
also in a soccer club called Orients. He had a future and he told himself
that he was going to be somebody and he didn’t drink or smoke, he kept
busy - he kept himself busy by all this things that I’ve just mentioned
especially with school.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

If you - if he was still alive, do you think he was still going to be at
school?

MS ZANTSI

Oh! yes I am sure he would be even out of school by now.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now where is your father right now?

MS ZANTSI

Sonny Boy’s father can you please repeat that. Sonny Boy’s father died in
1993.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

And now you are the only ones left?

MS ZANTSI

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

If the Commission had anything to do for you, what is your wish or
wishes? What do you think the Commission can do for you, how can we help?

MS ZANTSI

The only thing I can ask the Commission is that usually on - every -
every June 16th we know that Sonny Boy died. This - we are reminded of
this by the newspapers and the TV when we see Hector Petersen’s picture
we actually hoped that we will also have something that they did to
Hector Petersen, something with his name in it. And if it’s just a stone
with his name on it just like Hector Petersen’s case I would be very
satisfied with that.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Oh! thank you.

CHAIRPERSON

Thank you.

MS ZANTSI

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Is there anyone now who has questions, Denzil?

ADV POTGIETER:

We’ve received some information about the incident involving your brother
there was a inquest held into the death and you’ve already indicated that
it was found that no-one was liable for the death. It was alleged that he
was engaged in throwing stones at the time. Can I just ask you according
to the findings as well the official findings he died as a result of a
gunshot wound to the head, is that correct?

MS ZANTSI

Yes that is the truth, he was shot in the head.

ADV POTGIETER:

And we have been given some information about the specific date of the
incident, perhaps I can just confirm that. The date is given as the 16th
of September 1976 would that be correct?

MS ZANTSI

Yes that’s true.

ADV POTGIETER:

And just a - just a final issue, you say that there was indications that
somebody who was wearing a red scarf was - was somehow involved in the
incident, is that so?

MS ZANTSI

Yes that’s true, it was a red scarf.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you say this as a police [indistinct]

MS ZANTSI

Yes it was a boer policeman. He was driving a red Valiant.

ADV POTGIETER:

And what was the - what was the - what was said was he in uniform or what
was he - how was he - how was he dressed?

MS ZANTSI

They say he was wearing his uniform but I didn’t see him, but I only saw
the van, but it was passing my house speedily, I was standing next to the
gate. But I didn’t know that, that was the car that was shooting people.
I only saw that there is this Valiant that was shooting at people.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Mary, no.

DR BORAINE:

Ms Quay, good afternoon Ms Quay.

MS QUAY:

Good afternoon.

DR BORAINE:

You are going to give evidence that you actually saw Sonny Boy being
killed but before you do that, I must ask you to please stand and take
the oath.



MS QUAY				Duly sworn states









DR BORAINE:

Thank you please be seated. May we thank you very much indeed for coming
with your friend and Mr Ntsebeza will lead you now, thank you.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now thank you Dr Boraine. Mamma I am going to speak Xhosa with you. You
can take your earphones off your ears it’s all right so that we can talk
directly to each other. Mamma I just want you to say briefly and tell the
Archbishop and his Commission what you saw on that day. I found out that
you - you are 71 years old, is that so?

MS QUAY

Yes it is.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is your house at 3A no 48 is that so?

MS QUAY

Yes it is.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Could you please raise your voice mamma so that we can be able to hear
you clearly. Do you live at 3A?

MS QUAY

Yes I do.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

I thank you, I find that during this period it was chaos at Guguletu
during the deaths of this young boy, is that so?

MS QUAY

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is your house next to the road?

MS QUAY

Yes it is.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What kind of chaos or riots were these?

MS QUAY

These were children and policemen making all this chaos, but the kids
were not fighting. The chaos now was caused by kids running away from the
police. They would be running away - they would be running away from the
police into the houses.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now does it mean mamma you had to open all the doors?

MS QUAY

Yes that’s so. We use to close the front door and the back door and hide
inside.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Is that when now you had to hide?

MS QUAY

Yes that it, because we were afraid of the boers.





ADV NTSEBEZA:

On this particular day did the same thing happen, did you see people
running from the road coming into the houses?

MS QUAY

Yes it is.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Was there a time when you had to run and look through the back window.

MS QUAY

Let me explain this, our houses are carriages I am on the third door,
there is this corner house, we didn’t have slabs at that time, there were
only fences. These kids came running, when we saw them coming in running,
we closed the doors, we went to hide into the room it’s not a long
distance from that corner to where we live. Some had to jump over the
fence and they would come from the 56th road.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

When you said they are hiding, in the bathroom, which bathroom was this?

MS QUAY

Yes this was my bathroom.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

So in other words they were at the back of your house?

MS QUAY

Yes it is.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

So these places are the same places that people wash their clothes in at
the back?

MS QUAY

Yes it is because the toilets are at the back, they are not in the houses.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

So these people are actually in your own toilet?

MS QUAY

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

So mamma what did you see?

MS QUAY

We saw a white man, he stood next to the bathroom. The bathroom of no 47,
I stay at no 48. This white man shot with something.

INTERPRETER:

The witness is showing like he is showing the rifle.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Did the white man have a rifle in his hands?

MS QUAY

Yes he did.







ADV NTSEBEZA:

Were end of Tape 9, side B … in my own house - from no 47 next-door to my
house at no 48. We saw him dragging two of these children one already
dead. How was he dragging these two children?

MS QUAY

He was holding them their legs just like this, he was dragging them. The
other one was just about to die, he was still foaming. He was still
gasping.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

And after that did he - did he put them into a van?

MS QUAY

No we didn’t see that - we didn’t see them putting them in the van, but
we saw him - we saw him digging up the hole for the brains of this other
boy.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Please mamma repeat that when you say this, when you saw this hole, did
you see these brains?

MS QUAY

Yes we did.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Who’s brains were these?

MS QUAY

They were Sonny Boy’s brains, it is the white man who dug hole for his
brains.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Did you know Sonny Boy’s father as a neighbour?

MS QUAY

Yes I did.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

As you knew him how did this affect him?

MS QUAY

I don’t think this - he took well - he took it well because even then you
could see that mentally he was very much affected. This continued with
him until he died.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Could you see that he still had no hope for his life?

MS QUAY

Yes I did.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Thank you.

DR BORAINE:

Ms Quay if I could just [indistinct] clarity about your evidence, you
were standing in your house looking through the window is that right?

MS QUAY

Yes that’s true I was in my bedroom.

DR BORAINE:

And you saw Sonny Boy?



MS QUAY

We - I saw him, but he was already dragged - he had already been dragged
by that time by this white man. We saw him when he was already dead, it
was Sonny Boy I know that he has an oval shaped head we could identify
him.

DR BORAINE:

So you didn’t see him actually being shot?

MS QUAY

We only saw a man firing a shot, we saw the men coming, this white man
coming and picked them up and he dragged them.

DR BORAINE:

Was there one man or more than one man, policeman?

MS QUAY

No it was only one man he took them out of the yard.

DR BORAINE:

Was he wearing anything around his head?

MS QUAY

Yes he had something around his head.

DR BORAINE:

What was it?

MS QUAY

It was just something red around his head.





DR BORAINE:

Now before you heard the gunshots, did the policeman shout and warn or
say anything at all?

MS QUAY

No there were no shootings.

DR BORAINE:

Was there just shots?

MS QUAY

That’s right.

CHAIRPERSON:

Priscila and you mamma thank you very much, we know that this - this
revival of all this atrocities - we know that all these hurt. We hope
that by doing this, that this is going to heal you too, all your wounds
will also be healed.

The reason why we tell all these stories is because we want our nation to
know everything that was done in the past. So that what we have today,
this new freedom, so that everybody should know that we got it at a very
high price, thank you.



