
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 3 - WEDNESDAY 7 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00792

VICTIM:				SHIRLEY GUNN

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		TORTURE AND DETENTION BY POLICE

TESTIMONY FROM:		SHIRLEY GUNN



CHAIRPERSON: Please stand, I am told that you want to do an affirmation,
certainly do that.

SHIRLEY GUNN			Affirms to speak the truth

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, you may be seated.Mary Burton will
facilitate your testimony and I am going to hand over to her now.

MS BURTON: Thank you Denzil, I am trying to get as close to this as
possible so that people can hear and if you would do the same thing
please.Welcome and thank you very much for coming today to testify at
this public hearing.When we decide how to ask people to come to these
public hearings, we try to make sure that there is a balance in many
ways.And one of the ways is to ask people who have been well known
figures in the community and also people who's stories were not so well
known and we are fortunate in having here today woman who have played
strong leadership roles in the community and are well known as well as
others who's stories may have been noticed at the time, but have slipped
away.So we are very grateful to all of the people who have come here to
testify but thank you very much for coming because you really have been a
role model in - over many years and it's important that people should
hear from you in your own words of the experience that you had wrongly
defamed as a saboteur and detained for a long period with your very young
child.So please tell us in your own words and at your own time, the story
you've come to tell us. --- There are two Human Rights violations that I
have chosen to focus on, there could be many more, but I have decided to
focus on those two only.The first is being accused for Khotso House, the
explosion there and the second is the torture that my son and I enjoyed
in 1990.The first part is difficult because it's become - my story
is[indistinct] in a kind of a legal framework and when one speaks about
one's experience and the Law they don't easily mesh.And so I am going to
try and tell you in my own words, forgive the improper way to any legal
fraternity around here.But I will tell my story in my way.In - on the
31st of August 1988 we read with shock and horror about an explosion that
took place in Johannesburg.The pictures in the paper were completely
horrifying and shocking and 21 people were injured.And at the time nobody
owned up for doing that.And I was in Cape Town at the time, I was a
member of Umkhonto we Sizwe, and on the 10th of January the following
year 1989, I happened to have been eight months pregnant at the time, I
learned at four o'clock over the radio that a Major Jaap Joubert reading
out a statement in Pretoria, accusing me of Khotso House.Well there was
absolutely nothing I could do, it was a horrifying experience since I was
in the underground and what in fact - what had happened right then as he
blamed me and he was reading this statement on behalf of Mr Adriaan Vlok,
that - that they would kill me when they saw me.It was from that minute I
was on death row.Conditions in the underground were very-very hard, and
we observed the strictest of security and were extremely disciplined but
this was one massive blow.And I could obviously - I had to carry on and
it was in 1990 after the unbanning of the ANC at a point in my life where
I as a woman, really needed to be with other woman and I really needed to
be with my mother too, specifically.And - and my sister and a whole - we
had organized a way of getting together and we were going to the Karoo
and I was - this - all -this didn't work out because I was informed
upon.And the Security police captured me at this venue in the Karoo in
Victoria West.And there I was with my infant, who was 16 months old at
the time, the wanted terrorist they had, they now had me.Of course I mean
my conscience was clear, I was a committed member of Umkhonto we Sizwe
and we - it was not policy to go to bomb a place like Khotso House.And I
personally was horrified that I was accused of that atrocity.But there I
was, I was in their hands.I knew of my innocence in this matter but it
was a blunder that they had me and that they had me alive.Their boots,
the boots of their vehicles and there were numerous vehicles there at the
time, in this remote rural area, were filled with huge big metal cache's
full of military wear, they were intend on - on killing me, but they
didn't have me dead, they had me alive.And since I had raised my infant
in the underground, under these very-very-very hard conditions there was
absolutely no question about the fact that he was going to come to me
because - with me because I was the only person that he really knew.That
fear that I lived with, and still live with in a sense, it's - you can't
describe it, I was put into these vehicles, there was hardly enough
space, I don't know how they organized it, because the boots were full,
but I was packed up, and we were taken on a hell raising trip back to
Cape Town, thrown around, around the bends, I ended up in - for the night
in Table View, then taken to Culemborg, booked in under Section 29, taken
to Wynberg police cells and that is where we were staying - we stayed for
a while.We stayed in that cell in Wynberg until a certain - until my son
had returned to me but I'll go into that in the Human Rights violation.I
- as a result of my arrest, nobody fell, nobody was arrested, I managed
to keep my cool, I was petrified because I was in a situation where I was
number one bomber in the country and it was a huge blunder on their
part.And I - from minute to minute didn't know what they were going to do
with me and my son, they had us, and they could do whatever they
liked.Finally I was released and there were some very-very minor charge
that was pinned on me, a very insubstantial charge of a Makoroff pistol
that they said was mine.And I tried to keep my head above water and I am
still trying to keep my head above water.They at that time, you know
there was absolutely nothing I could do because clearly it was the right
that had been responsible for that atrocity and not us in the library
forces.Precisely who, I didn't know, and I only knew in December of - or
November of 1994 when two Security policeman made a confession and
submitted that to the Goldstone Commission, their names were Broodt and
the other one was Willem and they in protective custody somewhere.Where
they said that they had been responsible, and that Mr Adriaan Vlok had
personally congratulated the forces for their tremendous success in
creating havoc and(indistinct)and for that particular bomb.And at that
point I thought you not going to get away with this.And I laid a criminal
charges against Mr Vlok, both individually and severally which means that
in his individual capacity as I sued him - I am suing him, for
R500-thousand and because he happened to have been the Minister of Law
and Order at the time, I sued the Minister - the ministry as well for the
same amount.The claim has different elements to it, but there is legal
fees and there is damages and there is reputation, there is lots of
things that is built into that, the detail is not important here.That -
this has taken a legal course and to date they have offered a settlement
which I will tell you about, but they are trying to say that the case is
prescribed, the case is prescribed because I didn't come forward after a
three period to say I didn't do it and so and so did it.Well I didn't
have that information and unknowing that information, I acted
promptly.And so I maintain that my three years of prescription started
from the time that Broodt and Willem made their confession to the
Goldstone Commission and not when Mr Kotze - Mr Vlok blamed me on the
10th of January 1989.What concerns me is that this is a matter that is of
public interest, that it's a criminal act and must be dealt with
correctly.That by hiding behind a technicality prescription we are
defending the culprits of the past, not we, but the new ministry which
happens to be the Minister of Safety and Security and Mr Vlok is now
represented by the State Attorney.They hiding behind their technicalities
and it is wrong and justice must be done.Now that's the one
matter.Implications of that are tremendous and you might want to ask some
questions, I might add more detail.But I want to focus now on - on the
form of torture that they used against me in 1990 when I was captive.
After - after a few days of interrogation and I knew these men were up to
no good, they had -they were asking me about details of my life.Which had
been public knowledge and I could add not more than they knew, they had
me, they wanted me, they had me, but I still had to tell who I was.It was
most bizarre, they started saying to me that I am a very terrible person,
that I can put my son through this episode.That I had chosen to give my
life for the liberation of our country.That I am subjecting my child to
these conditions in a prison and to grueling interrogation sessions.And
that if I had any heart, I would him over to my family or I would hand
him over to them and they would - they would put him in a place of
safety.Of course I couldn't begin to - to entertain this thought, it was
too painful to begin to consider, I knew - I know the contents of the
Child Care Act, because I am a social worker, by training, I specialized
in community social work.I've also worked in a children's home in an
institution which catered for 75 children in need of care, I know as a
house parent exactly how much time and loving and giving you can give to
a group of 16 in that case it was I had 16 children that in care of.And
there is no - there is no way that the quality of love and care that I
could give my son, despite the appalling conditions.It was going to be
better then what they had to offer.And my son, because of the way we had
to sacrifice, he didn't know people beyond myself that he could trust,
and he was breast fed.Most of his sustiments came from breast feeding.it
was something I just couldn't entertain.And then on the 3rd of July - 5th
of July, two social workers arrived at Culemborg where I was interrogated
every day, the one social workers name was Ms Robertson and I don't know
what the other's name was.And they said that they were coming to removed
my child.And I tried to argue with these people, I tried to find out what
the morality of it is, what - to what their conscience, what their
conscience felt, how they could do this you know.My child I put him on
the table I showed him that despite these disgusting conditions in which
we were being held at Wynberg police station, and here in Culemborg,
which was concrete and not a kind of place for a toddler that he was in
perfectly good hands and in good condition and they had no right to
remove my child.And I tried to reason with them, I tried to argue with
them, I asked them where they graduated, I asked them bits and pieces
about themselves, I tried to get into their heads, I said they could take
a stand if they felt that what they had been ordered to do was wrong and
they said it's no good my talking, but they have a warrant for my - for
the arrest of my 16 month old baby and they were going to take him away.I
was mad, I was absolutely mad and Haroon at this stage could detect my
distress and he started crying, and they took him away from me and I
followed them to the grid at the entrance of Culemborg and they forced me
in and they took him out and Haroon was screaming, he was screaming for
me, his arms were stretched towards me and - and he was shouting for me.I
was utterly hopeless there was nothing I could do at all, but I turned
around when I heard - I turned around and I went straight back into that
room where I was always interrogated and I went to the window where I was
never allowed to go, you not allowed to have a glimpse of blue sky.And I
decided that I was going to go on a hunger strike, that was all I could
possibly do to try and get my child back to me.And I declared within a
few minutes that, that is what I intended doing, that I was not going to
eat and I was not - and I was not going to eat until they brought my
child back to me.And they looked very shocked and soon after that, soon
after they had taken my child away, they put me in a vehicle and they
drove me back to Wynberg police station on my own and I was locked up
again.I was completely and utterly numb, I couldn't think about Haroon, I
couldn't think about - I couldn't focus on how I felt, because I would
have broken down, I would have snapped if I had thought about what I
felt, I dissociated myself from this experience.And the interrogation
intensified, they brought out Spyker van Wyk, they brought out these
people, I mean I named my son after Iman Haroon and here was his murderer
in front of me.But what I did in this cell, I just went on this ritual, I
asked them for a mob and I asked him for disinfectant and I wanted to
clean it you know it was absolutely disgusting.The toilet, this was when
Haroon was still with me, the toilet didn't work and when you flushed the
toilet, the contents filled to the top of the bowl and it flowed out of
the bowl and under the bed and into the yard, it was quite disgusting and
we had to watch the toilet paper and the contents flowing out under our
bed.And it was freezing-freezing cold, the doors had to be standing open,
we had to sleep in a bed so that the warden on - the police woman on the
other side of the yard, could look at us at all times, that's how we were
guarded through a yard in the freezing cold, we were meant to live under
those conditions.But anyway once Haroon has gone and I was feeling as
numb as this, I thought let me just mob this place and I demanded
disinfectant and it stunk, the mob was black, the water was black, there
was really no good in doing this exercise at all, but I went through
it.And I think I felt a little bit cleaner having done it.And that night
I realized, well my breast became incredibly sore and any woman who has
known how difficult it is to express milk in the freezing cold, will bear
a testimony that sitting on a high bed which is like a hospital bed, it's
high, in the freezing cold, with the doors open, it would have been, it
would have been warmer sleeping on the street on - on cardboard.Because
at least you could pull something over your head, I wasn't allowed to do
that.I had to express this milk, and I realized what a fool I was, how
could I declare a hunger strike because that was going to effect to my
breast milk and why should they decide when I should stop feeding my
child.And I just realized that this - that I couldn't go through with
this and that I was going to have to express milk as much as I could to
keep my system going.And I had decided the next day when I was fetched at
7:30 and taken to Culemborg and interrogation carried on, I decided I was
not going to - I was not going to go - carry - continue with the hunger
strike, but I allowed them to masquerade in front of me.I wanted to see
what was in their minds and they had bought liters and liters of juice
and they had it in the fridge and they kept on offering me juice, because
I said I was going to drink.And then they threatened to take me to some
prison in the Free State to deal with me, because I'd gone on a hunger
strike and then I'll be further away from my child.And then by finally
sort of mid morning I said no you haven't got me, I am not going to go on
a hunger strike, because it's not your decision that I terminate now -
feeding my child.And I could see this sort of they a little bit
deflated.And instead I said that they must take the milk to my child
whether he is, that I will express regularly and they must take it to
him, because that is what he knows, and that is what is going to keep him
strong.And they refused to do that, and I carried on, I carried on, doing
this, expressing my milk, expressing my milk and then 8 days later I was
in the Wynberg police cells, they returned my baby to me.He was visibly
depressed, his eyes were sunken into his head and he was thin, it was
clear that he hadn't eaten, he looked at me, there was this sort of
glassy look in his eyes, it took some time for him to - to his eyes to
warm up a bit and his body to warm up a bit and for him to feel that he
was back with me.And he started feeding okay and then he hopped off the
bed and he potted around what I though was now the clean cell and he was
back at home.He was okay, you know it didn't matter that this scummy
place that I was in, he was okay, he was with me and that was what
mattered.And this was absolutely marvelous somehow, well everything that
they had tried to do, to break me and I think I omitted some very
important detail, that in the time that he was gone and the interrogation
intensified, they repeatedly told me that I was hopeless, useless, not
fit to be a mother.That if I listened at night in my cell in Wynberg
police cells, I would be able to hear him crying, because he was quite
nearby.And they even brought a tape recording of his voice and there was
so much(indistinct) in my son's voice as he called my name, mamma, mamma
on the tape.And you know my feelings I can't - it's not easy to describe
it, I was dissociated from what I felt.But he was returned to me, 8 days
later.And the following day it was a Friday, the investigating officer,
the Security policeman came and he said he was taking us - the two of us
away, he didn't say where.We were booked out of Wynberg police cells,
thrown in the back, me handcuffed, my hands behind my back, and Haroon
clasping onto me, still very-very destroyed by this experience and clingy
and indigent and - and they went on this wild sort of amateurish
recollectence where they would go around circles and throw us around in
the backseats, trying to see whether they had picked up a tail whether
the coast was clear, whether they could take me to this unknown
destination.And they drove and drove and they went over the mountain and
then finally they dropped us off at the Caledon Vrouens Gevangenis.And
there we were kept in the sickbay, the women's sickbay.It was attached to
the woman's section, it's a medium term prison.And there we had three
single cells, onto a passage and there was a bathroom and there was also
a basin where one could do washing.The facilities were certainly better
than they were at Wynberg police cells.But there was one huge problem,
and that was that the only contact that I had with the world was a bell
in my cell.And I tested it and tested it and I kept on reporting that
this bell does not work, and they must come and fix it, because I had -
if the bell doesn't work, how am I going to communicate with them because
there was nobody sitting with me at all times.It was much later that I
worked out how the communication system worked out - functioned in that
prison and I'll describe it to you.In the men's section in the passage
there was a board and on the board there were cell numbers and if you
rang your bell the flap would flip up and they would, if a warden was
walking passed they would see that prisoner X in cell 40,000 wanted
assistance.And then they would come to you, but two days after Haroon was
returned to me, and we were now in Caledon Vrouens Gevangenis, he became
extremely ill and I really was extremely worried.I have done - I studied
as a nurse, I was a student nurse after matriculating, and I did more
than my first year of pediatrics because I loved it, and I had a sick
baby on my hands.He was not only traumatized psychologically, but he was
physically weak, he was thin, he was still depressed and he had diarrhea
and he was vomiting and he was just going down, down, down.And I pressed
the bell, and I pressed the bell and there was no response.Then I finally
I mean I really got desperate and I carried on ringing and then finally
in the night somebody came -a man came out on the outside of the cell and
he shouted it was howling that night, and he shouted are you ringing the
bell, and I was shouting at him I am ringing the bell, I've got - I need
medical attention, my child is very ill, he is vomiting and he has
diarrhea and I need a doctor.And there was silence, so I stood on top of
the locker and I yelled through this - this mesh windows, dirty window,
yelled the same thing and - and then his footsteps just disappeared into
the night again.And he was gone, and I had to nurse my baby and he was
very much weaker by the next day.And I reported this incident to the
major in charge of the prison, Major Koen and a doctor Basson finally was
sent to us and the doctor Basson said to me, there is nothing wrong with
your baby, he just has chronic diarrhea and vomiting, there is something
wrong with you.And I was so angry, I was so powerless and so angry that
this was the attitude of the people that were looking after my baby, I
wasn't at all confident that they were going to treat him properly.And it
took a long time for Haroon to pull through.He was so weak that I mean I
had to carry him everywhere, he couldn't walk again, he had to sort of
learn to walk again.And of course living in a concrete environment for a
toddler is very hard and stressful because toddlers fall and they hurting
themselves all the time, so you have to all - at all times watch and it
was a very strenuous thing that we had to go through.And finally after 60
days - 64 days of hell and fear because as I've described to you they had
this wanted person, I didn't know what they were going to do with me.I
shouldn't have been alive, their story didn't work with me alive.But they
finally released us and I have since then been struggling with a
condition known as Post Traumatic Stress Disorder where one is very-very
anxious, depressed and marginalized.Anxious in the sense that I think
it's possibly a rational fear for mother's to have that their children
can go missing or can get stolen, you have to watch your children, that's
your responsibility.But mine was not a fear, it was a reality, my child
had been stolen and there was every good reason that it could happen
again, and that my anxiety was exaggerated.We couldn't leave each other,
see - allow each other to get - we were unable to allow each other to be
separated.And - and depression, at a very deep-deep profound level, it's
lifted in waves, and I must say the last wave lifted during or just after
the election campaign, I was engaged again in work that I love and that
is working with people on the ground and their houses, organizing them
and there was such a tremendous reception you know when I went into
people's houses and told them to vote for Solly Moosa and why and so on,
and they shared at such an incredible deep level somehow they knew
Shirley Gunn they had known my story and they just related at such a deep
level, they brought out pictures and it was really very good for me.And I
know just exactly how much I want to be part of things again, what has
kind of happened to me because of how I've suffered.I - the - what's
happened - sorry - just gone off.The dilemma that I think that most
ordinary parents experience in their life ant that is the tussle between
their professional selves and their maternal selves or their parenting
selves.it's a dilemma that we all spaced with, but mine is more
exaggerated because of what I'd gone through.And I've left here at 3:30 -
not because - or 3:15 not because I haven't wanted to listen to the next
testimony, because I wanted to go and fetch my son.So it's affected me in
that way, that I don't fit into the ordinary kind of structure any
more.And maybe I will someday, maybe I mean I - maybe I will overcome but
I am not there yet.And I agonize and I pain that I am not able to be
really part of the transformation of our country, working in a - working
as my colleagues are.But it's because I am tied to this experience.Maybe
I should stop here.

	Thank you very much Shirley, I think that everybody will share with me a
sense of being very deeply moved by your story and the vividness with
which you portraiture us.The questions that I have are perhaps relate to
some of the earlier part and the comments also I think the issue of
prescription for example is one that we've heard from many people.The
frustration at not being able to pursue a case because of time has
elapsed during which no action could have been taken.And I believe that,
that's something that the Truth Commission must look into.Also the
question of the responsibility of the State, even though it is a new
State for what happened in the past.This is something that we've learned
from Truth Commissions in other countries, that it has been part of the
healing process when the new State accepts the responsibility for the
actions of the old.So I hope that in those areas, there may be progress
that we can make.And would like to clarify of the status of your claim is
at the moment. --- Well it's just hanging there really, the next step is
- oh! well in fact on the 31st of July the Supreme Court ordered that the
State Attorney hand over all documents related to the matter, the
investigation into Khotso House.The affidavits given over to the
Goldstone Commission, all these documents be handed over so that we could
proceed.And that date lapsed on the 31st of July, we now in August.At the
time of writing this a couple of days ago, well not - well updating this,
we did not have that information yet. But the legal - the legal course is
on track, the matter must be heard in the Supreme Court.

	I have no more questions at the moment, thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Perhaps just on the legal issue as well just to see to what
extend the Commission could be of assistance.Is there any doubt
whatsoever about the fact that the statement which was released on behalf
of Mr Adriaan Vlok, was false concerning Khotso House and your alleged
involvement. --- It was totally and utterly false and fabricated.

	And has there been some further development very recently in regard to
that incident, and the police? --- Well yes, I believe that quite a
number of policeman, who have been involved in Human Rights violations,
outstanding Human Rights violations including Khotso House, have - are
feeling the ground as to whether they going to get amnesty and I think
that they have approached the Truth Commission.

	So to your knowledge at this stage there has been an approach on behalf
of some police personnel. --- Yes.

	Seeking or investigating the prospects of getting amnesty in regard to
that same incident at Khotso House. --- That's quite correct.

	And of course implying in that process that they have been responsible.

--- yes.

	For that incident. --- Yes.

		Thank you for that.

MS BURTON: There is a question I would like to ask about the social
workers who came to you and then took away your son.Were they employed by
the State and they said they had a warrant to take him. --- Well
interesting I mean whether they were employed by the Welfare and Social
Service or the Health and Social Services or by the police, but they were
acting on the instructions of the police, they had a warrant for his
arrest.Ms Robertson was the chief social worker at the time, most people
that have worked in Child Welfare know her.She came with another woman, I
remember in the course of speaking to them, one graduated in
Potchefstroom and the other one in the Free State or something.They were
both professional social workers and they did this.

	And is there anything ... (intervention) --- And can I add.

	Ja. --- When I was in New York I addressed an audience of social workers
and allied workers,(indistinct) ... psychologist and so forth about Human
Rights abuses in our country.And there was a woman an aboriginal woman at
this conference.And she spoke about how young aboriginal children are
removed from their families by social workers and taken to white families
and told that is the only way their children have a future.And she spoke
about social workers as the enemy, that is what I experienced, social
workers performed the work of the enemy.

	Are there things that you would like to ask for the Truth Commission to
do? --- Yes millions of things.As I've been sitting here I must say it
has been very-very difficult to focus on my matters.I think we are people
with over developed senses of responsibility, and I've been sitting here
in this audience and listening to the stories of men and woman and there
are so many things that are untied, there are so many things that have
still to be done, so many murder dockets that have to be opened, some
many re-inquests that have to be re-opened.We have to pursue the truth
with all vicar, I don't think we can sit back and say just by speaking
that's enough.This is part of it, and I am very-very-very grateful that
I've the opportunity to be part of this, because I think it's pulled me
out of feeling that extreme marginalisation, it's pulled me closer and I
feel very grateful for that.But that's not the end, that's the beginning
and all these outstanding matters must be dealt with and we must have
funds as Zubeida had requested we must have funds for the casualties, the
people that are sitting here, with physical pain that can't afford to pay
medical bills, there must be a fund for this people.And I agree I mean
apartheid has cost so much to put in place, to keep in place, to force in
place, we must have the money to deal with the victims.And that money
must be found, we can't say we don't have that money.

	Anything else. --- Yes, my boy Haroon has two request, the one is he
wants to meet with Archbishop Desmond Tutu, he would like to meet with
him, but more urgently he wants to meet with the President.And I would
like you to help me facilitate that meeting.I think that when we talk
about affirmative action, when we talk about the role of woman in our
society and the role that we have to play, and reintegration of people
like me, cadres like me, then we must understand what systems must be put
into place, because I want to work and I want to be productive, but I
don't fit in out there so easily.And - and we must make allowances for
people like me so that we can be productive, and we can be fully part of
what's happening around us.And I want that very-very deeply. 	Any more
questions?

	I have no more questions. --- I have got one more question, I want to
just explain something that you know - you know whilst we listening to
how we as woman have been exploited by the system, how they(indistinct)
... how they exploited the very-very fundamentals of being a woman and
that was being a mother, how they exploited that in order to get to me.I
want to tell you a funny story of how you know senses of humor in fact
have helped kept us together and I must say I mean I've had very few
laughs for a long time.But I want to explain something to you.At
Culemborg when I was interrogated, I don't want water - I use to say to
these men, these big white men, that they must clear out of the room
because I wanted to express my milk now, I was in agony.And that I needed
hot water, and only the woman could be present naturally, and I was
brought big container - a big container of warm water, which cooled down
very quickly because it was a wide - a wide pan and as soon as it was
cold, I could no longer really express milk very easily, so I asked for
more.But I want to show you something that if you pour a little bit of
water in a liter of water, a little bit of milk in a litre of water, it
goes milky white.And these buckets of water - of milk were coming out of
the interrogation room, pans of them and the men were hopelessly
intimidated by this.So times we have to seize being a woman and take
advantage of that.I didn't add that I have also a second child and her
name is Hani, she is named after Chris Hani and she is beautiful, very
blessed.

	Thank you Shirley, I said you were a strong woman, it takes strength
also to bring us that relieve of tension in an almost Shakespearean
way.Thank you very much.I think we have taken very much to heart the
things that you have said about our task, out task as the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission because there are things that we are chart with
doing and we must fulfill that responsibility as best we can.We're also
very conscious that this work of reconciliation and recreation of our
country is a bigger task than ours alone and the country as a whole needs
to embrace it, to bring about the kind of things that you are talking
about.The space for people to heal, the space for people to be
themselves, the space for people to be productive and contribute to the
nation building.So thank you very-very much for your contribution today,
we very grateful. --- Thank you.





