
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 2 - TUESDAY 6 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:			CT00405

VICTIM:				YAZIR HENRY

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		TORTURE AND DETENTION BY SECURITY 			

		POLICE

TESTIMONY FROM:		YAZIR HENRY



YAZIR HENRY				Duly sworn states

COMMISSIONER: Thank you very much, you may be seated.

MR POTGIETER: Yazir we've come to know each other the past day or so and
if you don't mind I'll use your

first name.

--- That's fine - it sounds a bit funny on this thing, it's fine.

	The testimony that you will give relates to an experience which happened
at a very young age and

which has affected and fundamentally changed your life.But before we get
to that, perhaps just by way of

introduction, tell us about yourself, what do you do, who you are. ---
Well can you hear me.

	Yes. --- Well I think I am a committed member of the African National
Congress and an officer of it's

former Military Wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe.At the moment I am 26 years old
and I am reading for an honours

degree in Sociology at the University of Cape Town, in my statement I
call it Political Sociology because for me

everything is political.I don't know how in depth you want to me go about
myself about where I am at the

moment before I read my statement there is about two things I'd like to
say.The statement is about my story it

doesn't relate to some extend to my family who themselves have suffered
tremendously.I have been estranged

from my family for a long time.There are some friends in the audience who
don't know me, we know me as

Yazir, who know nothing about my history.Who have helped me to get this
far.To them I want to say thank

you, I don't mention them in my statement, to them I want to say thank
you, they know who they are.And I

also want to say that the process of coming here has been a long one and
a hard one.A decision that I didn't

take lightly, a decision that I took after careful consideration and lots
of traumatic experience and discussions

with the people who have helped me to stay sane if you can call me that
at this point in my life.I want to say

especially thank you to - for being with me.And to whoever may listen, ja
I don't know I think maybe it's best to

start so we can get into it.

	Yes well [intervention] --- Because my statement will give you a history
of where I am, where I come

from.

	Certainly, well thank you for those words of introduction.You've dealt
with your history how you got

drawn into politics at a very early age, how you got drawn into the
structures of Umkhonto we Sizwe, time that

you've spent outside the country and your eventual return and the events
that happened after your return.So

perhaps it's a good stage for you to take us through that process.---
Okay, with your permission I would like to

read my statement which I made to you, which only captures a small
skeleton of that process which might lead

us as an introduction.

	Certainly you can proceed.--- Ja and the statement that I read now, ja
anyway.My former name was

Mark Henry.In 1991 I changed it to Yazir Henry because Mark was a name
that I could no longer live with.I

said that this was on religious grounds, but it was much more than
that.Mark was a name that brought me

ostrasisation, it brought me shame and it brought me great danger. I am
26 years old now, I am currently

reading for an honors degree at the University of Cape Town.In this
submission I will attempt to recapture an

experience at the hand of the state that has scarred me for life and has
caused me immeasurable psychological

trauma.This experience is very painful, especially since my existence and
what happened to me continues to

be ignored by the African National Congress, from which up until now I
have not formally relinquished my

membership.My experience, although I admit that there remains gaps in my
memory, is the truth about what

happened to me.it is the truth about what happened to me, that in order
to have some chance of continuing

must be made known.And I hope that by telling it, I may be able to wake
up from this nightmare that I have

lived ever since November 16th, 1989.A brief history before going into
exile.I was first introduced to active

politics in 1985.At the time I was in Standard 7 at Wynberg senior
Secondary School.i was 15 years ols.

This was a period of large scale political disruption and activity at
schools, met with excessive state brutality.

After the banning of the Congress of South African Students - after the
banning of COSAS, and SRC's, I

became active in Student Action Committees which grew in response to the
brutality of the State.I witnessed

the impunity with which the State detained, with which they maimed and
killed our people, that strengthened my

resolve to resist and to fight back.I became increasingly more
politically active and soon afterwards was

recruited into the underground structures aligned to the ANC.At the
beginning of 1986, following a spate of

arrests, myself and two other members, Ashley Forbes and Peter Jacobs of
our underground structures went

into exile with the strong believe that we would return stronger and
better equipped to fight the injustices of the

State and to protect our people against it's brutality.Even though I was
the youngest of the three, the level of

trust I enjoyed was such that I was given responsibility to receive the
most training and military specialization.

The plan was that they would come back and set up new structures and I
would follow with the necessary

military knowledge and expertise.We went to Swaziland, from there with
the assistance of the United Nations

High Commissioner we made contact with and formally joined the ANC in
Maputo, Mozambique.Exile, after

two weeks, after about two weeks, we were flown to Lusaka, Zambia where
we were screened and

subsequently discussed and concluded our political and military
objectives with the Military Political structures

of the ANC.We were then sent to Luanda, Angola where our group was split
up in order to put into motion

everything that we had planned.From Luanda I went to a training camp in
what was known in ANC circles as

the East.There I underwent my basic military training.About two months
into my training I was recruited into

the Security Structures of the ANC with the responsibility to look out
for and to report directly to the Camp Chief

of Security, any situation which might compromise the security of the
camp.I was subsequently also selected

to specialize in military engineering.At the beginning of 1987, at the
age of 17, I was sent to the Soviet Union

for a period of ten months for further specialization.There I specialized
in Special Intelligence and Military

Combat Work.During that period I was also appointed from Luanda, as the
Political Commissar for a group of

ten combatants.For me this was a very great honor and responsibility.On
the one hand, this trust which was

placed in me helped me consolidate and crystallize my own political
understanding of our struggle, whilst on the

other hand, this brought with it an awareness of the gravity of the tasks
that was at hand.I was thrust from

boyhood into a world that demanded constant vigilance, maturity and a
very high degree of vigilance.This also

demanded discipline and it demanded responsibility, nonetheless all this
served to increase my commitment to

our struggle for liberation.On completion of this training course I
returned to Luanda, whereupon I was

assigned to work with the Soviet Representative responsible for training
cadres of the underground inside South

Africa who had come to Angola for short periods of training.After a while
the Soviet Representative left and I

was given full responsibility for continuing this work.Towards the end of
1988 I was recalled to Lusaka, I was

informed that I would be part of a technical working group, subordinated
to Ronnie Ksrils, then heading the

Political Military Council.I felt that this assignment would not fulfill
the objective that I had initially gone into

exile for namely to received extensive military training and
specialization and return to the country.Secondly

the comrades with which I had originally left the country had been
arrested.For these reasons, I requested to

be reassigned to Military Headquarters.For these reasons I requested to
be reassigned to Military

Headquarters to put into practice what I had learnt and to continue as
per our original plan to - the work of my

comrades who had been arrested.Round about April, early 1989, I together
with Anton Franz, known to me

only as Mohammed, were infiltrated back into South Africa.Our group
Mohammed and I, upon leaving

Lusaka, were joined by other combatants.We traveled illegally through
Zimbabwe and Botswana..In

Gaberone the big group was split up and Mohammed and I continued on our
own.We infiltrated South Africa

through Botswana, through Bophuthatswana with the help of an MK
operative, who took us across the border

and returned to Botswana.Inside South Africa, we were instructed that
upon arrival in Johannesburg we were

to book into a particular hotel where we would be contacted.Our contact
took us to his home which was in

Bezz Valley, Johannesburg.After several days he informed us where and how
we were to meet our contact in

Cape Town.	In Cape Town, we met our contact who took us to a house where
we met others, it was two

others.Contrary to my expectations there was no clear briefing as to what
we were to do.Instead we were told

that we were to be debriefed.During the debriefing we would have to
inform them in detail of our training, our

political and military experience gained in exile and practically
instruct them in areas of combat with which they

were not familiar.For example for me there was - there seem to be an
expectation of writing training manuals

as no time period was specified this task seemed impossible as it could
go on for a very long time.As there

had been no prior briefing in Lusaka, the process that was unfolding was
extremely confusing.This was

exacerbated by the fact that we were charged with all household chores,
we were strictly confined to certain

areas of the house only and were I think openly viewed with suspicion.As
a result our interpersonal

relationships became strained to the point that there was open mistrust
and hostility.After living under these

circumstances for about a month I decided to leave.My decision was
prompted by the fact that a lot of the

basic rules of conspiracy that I had learnt were being broken.I felt that
I was being mistrusted and I no longer

trusted them.I felt that my life was in danger and that as a matter of
urgency, I needed to establish their

credentials from responsible structures in exile.I left the place without
their knowledge, contacted my sister

who assisted me to set up a place on my own.I lived in a separate entrace
under the guise of being a student

coming from Johannesburg.One day, purely by chance, I met Mohammed in a
shop.We spoke frankly with

each other, I conveyed to him my concerns I conveyed to him the concerns
that I had expressed.I conveyed to

him the concerns I had expressed - I had had an expressed the willingness
to meet with them.Mohammed and

the people in the house insisting that such a meeting should happen on
neutral grounds.His opinion was that

since i had left in the manner that I did, I did not have the right to
meet them on neutral grounds and that I

should go back with him to his place.I literally begged him not to show
me where he stays, but he coerced me

into going - into going with him.And once there he refused to let me go,
unless I tell him where I stayed.Once

he had extracted this information from me, he informed me that I would be
contacted at my house.Following

this inter action and my exposure I felt compelled to relocate.I felt
particularly vulnerable as the distrust

between me and the other comrades and I stress - and the other comrades
had not been dispelled, however, I

had run out of funds, and after careful consideration I decided to
relocate to my family home for a maximum

period of about three days during which time I hoped to organize
alternative accommodation.My arrest, about

the second day, I am not exactly sure anymore about exactly the days, at
my parent's home, at about 3:30 in

the afternoon I heard a commotion at the front door.The door was banged
open and several plain clothed

Security Police forced their way in, holding my father as a human shield
with a gun against his head.On

seeing me they shouted at me to raise my hands above my head.They pushed
my father out of the way and

rushed towards me.I must have had at least seven to eight guns pushed
into my body.They pushed me

facing the passage wall and started searching my roughly.Once it became
clear that I was unarmed they

handcuffed my hands behind my back, several shouted questions at me at
the same time asking where my

weapons were.Meanwhile more informed - uniformed, plain clothed policeman
entered the house, they were

tearing things apart, pulling things out of cupboards, searching the
ceiling, I mean they - they were all over.

They took me outside where there were even more police and they were
constantly hurling abuse at me.Some

of them were laughing, they were shaking hands and congratulating one
another, hugging.The officer who

seemed to be in charge sent radio messages saying repeatedly, die skaap
is in die kraal, skaap is in the

kraal,the sheep was in the kraal.In my mind I thought that this - this
would be my end.I was - I was put into

a car with three security policeman.In the car whilst driving off they
continued questioning me about my

weapons.They started questioning me about Mohammed.I told them that I had
no weapons and I did not

know what they were talking about.They took me -they first took me to
Grassy Park police station and then to

security police headquarters in Culemborg.Once at Culemborg the
questioning continued, repeatedly,

repeatedly they asked - they were asking me the same questions.They
wanted to know about my weapons

and the whereabouts of Mohammed, who they had identified as Anton
Franz.They showed me photographs of

myself, they showed me photographs, they showed me photographs of
Mohammed, they showed computer

printouts which they alleged was information that contained - that
contained information about our infiltration

into the country.This went on for hours, several of them questioned me,
others interjected hurling abuse -

insults whilst others observed.At one point somebody just walked in and
said wat praat julle nog met die

fokken donner why are you still speaking to this man, it wasn't a man,
they said die fokken donner, they said

why are you speaking to this fucking man.And he hit me, I think he hit me
about twice across the chest,

anyway, a Captain Liebenberg who seemed to be in charge, was the most
vociferous, the most abusive and

seemed to be - to be asking the most questions.Throughout this I
maintained that I had no weapons and that I

had no knowledge of Mohammed's whereabouts.After several hours of
unabated questioning Captain

Liebenberg informed me that my father had been arrested as well and that
they would ruin him since he had

aided and abetted a terrorist.Even then I maintained my position.I told
them that Mohammed and I had

disagreements and we had broken contact.At this point Captain Liebenberg
told me that unless I co-operate

and inform them of Mohammed's whereabouts, they would kill my mother and
nephew who at the time was

only 4.At the time because of what was happening to me, I did not see
this as empty threat.I believed that

they had arrested my father, the brutality and the tenacity with which
they questioned me and my knowledge of

what they had done to others, and were capable of doing, made their
threat to kill my family very real.I was 19,

I don't think that any 19 year old should have been given such a choice.I
had no choice basically, on the one

hand I knew that the disclosure of Mohammed's whereabouts would lead to
his arrest, and on the other hand, if

I did not tell them my family would be killed. Faced with the threat of
them killing my family I agreed to telling

them where Mohammed was.But only on the condition that my father be
released and that they leave my

mother and nephew alone.Even then I tried to stall time by saying that I
didn't know Mohammed's exact

location but could point it out on a map.Immediately thereafter I was
taken handcuffed to Pinelands police

station where I was shown a very big map of the Peninsula.I took a while
and then I showed them- I showed

them where he stayed.They then took me in the presence of a large
contingent of Security Police to his house,

upon confirmation that this was his house, many more police came.I was
then forced onto the floor of the car,

with my head between my legs and my hands cuffed behind my back, I
thought that would arrest Mohammed.

To my knowledge they entered the premises without warning I soon heard
gunshots, I could hear that the police

were afraid, they were running, they were running up and down, somebody
was shouting one of them had been

shot.They started shouting at Mohammed to come out, they - what followed
was a fierce exchange of gun fire,

I heard grenades - several grenades exploding.i think it was then that I
knew that it was not going to be about

arresting him, somebody shouted that they could not get in, and that he
had grenades.I heard a very big

explosion it sounded like a rocket had been launched and then - and then
there was silence.Somebody

shouted that it was all over.In my head I heard all the time, and even
now, although this time I am also asking

the same question, who sold me to the police, who sold me to the
police.Anton died, with that question on his

mouth and I wake up night after night with the same question.After this
-after all of this they took me to Athlone

police station where I was left for about two - three hours in a room
with a police guard.Thereafter I was taken

back to Culemborg where the questioning continued again.They wanted to
know about my weapons and the

contact that I had made.I was not sure what and how much they knew but I
was adamant that I was not going

to give them any more information that could result in death.Probably
late the following afternoon, with no

break from the interrogations, I was forced to sign a document making me
liable under Section 29.For the first

time, since my arrest, I was allowed to sleep.Thereafter and for the
following 2 - 3 weeks, they interrogated me

for hours on a daily basis at Culemborg taking me to Ravensmead police
station in the evenings, the line of

questioning was always the same.Where the weapons were, what was my
mission, who were my contacts.I

stuck to the legend that I had broken contact, that I did not have any
contacts.The interrogations lasted the

whole day, this would be repeated, it would be repeated day after day.I
would be so exhausted.I was tested

all the time, I would be put through the same, through a set of questions
the one day, the same questions would

be put to me the following day by a different set of people.During that
time I also came to know about a certain

person who's rank I don't remember, his surname is Coetzee, Andy Roelofse
and others who's name I cannot

remember.During this period Jeff Benzien came to me and said in
Afrikaans, and to that point I'd refused to

speak a word of Afrikaans, ken jy vir my, do you know me, I said no, I
looked at him straight in his face and I

hated him and I said no, I wasn't going to give him the satisfaction of
recognition and he smiled at me and he

said, I should then go and ask Ashely Forbes and Peter Jacobs because
they knew him.Where was I - after

witnessing what happened to Mohammed I could no longer believe that my
family was not harmed.I requested

to see my parents, this request was refused.I then embarked on a hunger
strike for about nine days I refused

to eat or drink anything before they gave in to a visit from my mother
and father.This meeting happened at

Culemborg on condition that the security policeman remains with us
throughout the visit, and that I do not tell

my parents about the hunger strike, thereafter I discontinued the hunger
strike.Immediately afterwards the

interrogations started again, but this time questioning happened both at
Culemborg and Ravensmead, often

late at night.For a while the questioning happened less frequently with
long periods of silence in between.And

then they started showing me thousands and thousands of photographs
asking me to identify and place people

who they alleged were members of the ANC, both internally and in
exile.One day after this had been going on

for several days, I was shown an album and asked to page through it, up
until this - up until this day, they did all

the paging, they had shown me the albums and were doing all the
paging.This day they gave me this album

and asked me to page through it.On about the forth or fifth page, I saw
something that to this day, I live

nightmares, I have nightmares about.The photograph was that of a severed
head of a severed head of

someone whom I had personally trained in Luanda.His lips and kidneys were
rolled up alongside his neck, his

eyes were open and there was dried blood on his lips.The rest of the
album contained photographs of his body

parts spread across his street.Present at this time was a Sergeant
Aggenbach and two others who said they

had driven all the way from Johannesburg just to see me.During this
period I was taken to different parts of the

country amongst others, Kimberley, Beaufort-West and Bophuthatswana,
where they wanted me to point out

where we had crossed the border.Despite the fact that I said that I could
not remember where they said I could

point anywhere and then they photographed me.Some time after this I was
transferred to Pollsmoor prison

here they continued to keep me in solitary confinement in a very small
cell where the lights were never turned

off.In the cell there was also a loudspeaker which was continuously
buzzing day in and day out, day in and day

out this thing buzzed, the buzzing noise had gotten into my head and was
driving me crazy.My head at times

felt like it was going to explode.At some point I was told by a warder
that the prisoners in - held in that section -

held in that section were all HIV positive.These were the same prisoners
that were bringing my food.The

possibility of me contracting aids became very real to me as one of the
prisoners had cut himself with a blade

and I was told that he had done it before.For the second time I went on a
hunger strike, demanding to be

removed from that cell.For about seven to eight days I refused to eat or
drink anything until they removed me

to Table View police station.Throughout this entire period I refused to
make a confession.I was exhausted, I

felt completely depleted of all energy and strength.All I wanted to do -
all I wanted was for Section 29 to be

over and to be formally charged either Aggenbach or Roelofse or one of
the others I don't remember, I -said

that if I sign a confession stating that I am a trained member of the ANC
that I trained in the Soviet Union, and

that I would agree to be video taped showing how to use arms, the case
against me would be completed and

they would forward it to the Attorney General and they will decide on
prosecution.I don't recall the exact

sequence of a lot of these events, but some time afterwards, I was taken
to Culemborg where Roelofse asked

me what I would do if they let me go right now.I laughed at him - I
laughed at him and said they should stop

playing games with me.He then asked me to sign a form which authorized my
release, I signed it.And said

that I would not leave unless my parents fetched me.I was informed that
they could not get hold of my parents,

whereupon they offered to take me home.Enroute Coetzee told me that he
was not such a bad guy and said

that the two of us could work well together.He then asked me if I would
not join the Security Police.He had

done this before even offering me a rank, he did not specify the rank.And
just like I had done before, I refused

his offer.And I swear that throughout this entire period I had not
revealed any information that could of

compromised the security of my contact in Johannesburg and those that I
had contacted in Cape Town, whom

I still could of had and had indirect contact with.My years of training
and my insight into the operations of

intelligence and security, afforded me to provide only information which
would give credence to my legend

whilst protecting information which I thought was crucial.To the best of
my knowledge, at no stage did I reveal

anything that could have led to more arrests or deaths.Throughout this
period the security of people whom I

had trained remained in tact.I should bear a testimony to my loyalty to
the ANC and to the people's struggle for

liberation in South Africa.At this point I'll say something and I'll
mention a name, that's not in my testimony,

can I do that?Whilst I trained in Luanda, whilst I worked in Luanda,
training combatants, preparing them to

come inside into the country and work, I trained a particular combatant,
who broke one of the most cardinal

rules of security and secrecy which I had[indistinct] and could have been
arrested had I broken completely and

given over to the police.Because she had appeared before my arrest on the
front page of the Sunday Times,

her name is Paula McBride.Should the TRC require further information,
I'll be willing to comply.On the very

day of my release I had a foretaste of what was to come.Some activist in
the area came to see me.I

remember one of them questioning them about what happened in prison and
what I thought should be done to

comrades who sold out in prison.I remember being extremely tired.I
replied that I had just been released and

that I was tired and that I'd give them a more detailed response at some
other time.They left, they left me none

of them came back.There is one person in the audience that has stood by
my, I won't necessarily mention her

name, she knows who she is, I have not forgotten you.I had similar
encounters with other comrades, some of

them - some of them seriously questioning my integrity and some even
openly accusing me of being a sell out.

I was told by a comrade who was extremely close to me that there were
some people who were very angry

about Anton's death and they were blaming me for it.At the same time
openly and to my face, she said that

people were being told that I am an askari.She mentioned a particular
incident in which another person who

was detained in Section 29 at the same time had been interrogated and
constantly in his interrogations the

police were using code Mike's Hotel, Mike's Hotel which had the same
initials as my name.And they were

interpreting it to be me who was giving this information.I was told by a
comrade, it's fine I'll go through it again,

that there were some people who were very angry about Anton's death and
that they were blaming me for it.I

realized that I was being viewed as a sell out and an askari.In the weeks
following my release from Section 29

I began to disintegrate.I lost weight, at one point I weighed 40 kg's
even less.My self confidence, self-esteem

and dignity was eroded even further.My ability to concentrate and
remember was seriously impaired.It

became impossible to sleep, I was and still am, constantly haunted by
nightmares.I remember looking into the

mirror and seeing somebody whom I didn't know.I could not accept that
some of my comrades whom I had

trusted could believe that I had become an askari and an enemy.I felt
that maybe the two people who could

attest to my integrity would be the ones with whom I had left the country
in 1986, Ashley Forbes and Peter

Jacobs.I went to see them on Robben Island hoping that there was
something that they could do to help clear

my name, they said that although they believed me, there was nothing they
could do to convince others and

that even on the Island they had been told that I had sold.I avoided all
political activity and organization.I

couldn't access any benefits such as AEPP grants etcetera which were
being - which were opened to other

political prisoners.I felt completely cut off from the organization and
mistrusted by it's membership and

leadership alike.I could not handle the contempt and the mistrust with
which I was looked at, I refused to leave

home and hide.I still hoped - I still hoped that according to the law of
the underground a senior member of the

movement would contact me and find out what really happened.But this
never happened.At some stage it

became to - it became known to me that an ANC Military Commission was to
sit at the ANC offices in Athlone, I

went hoping that I would have the - have an opportunity to relate what
really happened and be able to clear my

name.The Commission consisted of three comrades who were unknown to
me.Although there were brief

introductions I cannot recall their names and bear no knowledge of their
rank or seniority.To the best of my

ability I tried to explain but it appeared as though they were more
interested in proving a verdict.We agreed

that at a follow up meeting I should submit a written report, I wrote
this report.Where am I - I wrote this report

but did not have the confidence that if I were to include all the detail
it would be understood in it's proper

perspective.On submission of this report they started interrogating me
and accused me of lying.I then

requested to meet with a senior official who would be known to me and
whom - and whom I could speak to in

confidence, they were adamant that I should rewrite my report and that
they had sufficient authority to deal with

my case.They said that the report was not good enough and that they would
only accept a report which

contains the truth.They must of questioned me for several hours.It was
really painful as it felt similar to the

manner in which the boers had interrogated me.I left feeling very sick
and angry because it appeared that

basically all they wanted me to do was admit that I had killed Anton
Franz.I decided not to go back and would

try to make contact with either Chris Hani or Ronnie Kasrils.In my
possession is the original draft of the report I

submitted to the ANC.I am willing to make that available to the TRC.Some
time later I learned of a march

that was to take place in Cape Town.Amongst others to be led by Ronnie
Kasrils.I had hoped that he'd be

able to organize a fair hearing.And that I would be able to if he
established my dignity, at the first opportunity

during the march I approached Ronnie Kasrils in the company of Trevor
Manuel.I very briefly explained to him

what the issue was and that I could be contacted at my parent's home.He
responded that he did not have

much time, and he was returning to Johannesburg.I left with the
impression that I would be contacted later.

For months I waited and nothing happened.Instead the rumors about me
continued to be spread.I gave up

hope that my name would ever be cleared.It has been hard living and not
existing.I am alive but my existence

continues to be ignored.I have a question, where does culpability rest?In
retrospect, I believe that our

infiltration into South Africa was poorly planned.I believe that our
infiltration in South Africa was very poorly

planned.I believe that the lack of adequate briefing regarding our
mission inside the country, and the fact that

we were infiltrated together with other groups, greatly compromised our
security inside the country.I am also of

the opinion that the lack of briefing contributed to the circumstances
which led to my leaving the unit with which

I was to work with in Cape Town.I am also concerned by the lack of
concern the ANC displayed for the lives

and the security of it's combatants, which had infiltrated into the
country.Secondly, the untimely death of Anton

Franz must be viewed in the political and psychological circumstances
that prevailed at the time.I do not

believe that I can be held solely responsible for his death.And that the
role played by the Security Police must

be exposed.My expectations of the TRC.I request from the TRC that they
facilitate the following.That the

truth of my experience in detention be established and that all the
relevant documentation be obtained and

reviewed.That the circumstances around the death of Anton Franz be
investigated and that culpability be

apportioned where it belongs.And that he be afforded the respect with
which he died.That I am publicly

cleared of all rumors that I am an askari and I want to reiterate that I
have remained faithful and committed to

the struggle of oppressed South Africans for the human rights and the
human dignity.That there is public

acknowledgment - where am I - of my integrity and the restoration of my
dignity.I wish to be recognized for

who and what I am so that the falsification of my history be
rectified.That the truth about the circumstances

leading to my arrest and the names of those individuals or individual who
informed on me be made known to

me.Only then would I be able to reconcile myself with my own experiences
and with the death of Anton.That

the ANC acknowledges and recognizes it's responsibility to me as a member
of it's Military Wing.Also

acknowledging the role it played in the events that led to my arrest,
Anton's death and the pain and the suffering

that I have subsequently endured.That the ANC publicly apologizes for the
emotional damage the continued

spreading of false rumors caused without actually having availed
themselves to the truth.Especially since that

became possible that my Military Status and rank as an officer be
restored.Finally no - not finally - that the

pain and suffering that my family and the friends, the few friends that
have remained committed and that have

remained trusting, be recognized and that their pain and suffering also
be recognized and finally that the TCR

grants me the possibility of waking up from this terrible nightmare that
I have been living with for so many

years, so that I too may benefit from and hopefully contribute to the
process of healing that is taking place in our

country.I trust - I trust that you will afford me the opportunity - well
you doing this already, that is what I've

written down here anyway - to relate this experience at a public hearing
of the Truth and Reconciliation

Commission. Should you at any stage require additional information or
clarification, please feel free to contact

me.

	Thank you very much Yazir, we have listened intently and carefully and
with understanding to what

you've said.It's quite clear that the experiences that you've referred to
have been weighing very heavily on you

and probably still are doing that.I sincerely hope that the opportunity
that you had, that you've requested to

share that story and to tell that story, will bring some peace to you and
would assist, I'd hand you back to the

Chairperson, thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, is there any - Yazir thank you very much there is
not much that one can say we -

all of us are deeply moved by your own readiness to expose yourself in
the manner in which you have done.

They say sometimes it's easy on a full stomach to[indistinct] fasting.And
those of us who have not undergone

experiences such as the one's that you have been recounting, might
sometimes be very[indistinct] and they

sort of things that we - we might say.But what I think everyone of us
realizes is the incredible cost - the very-

very heavy price that has been paid for getting us where we are.And
especially by young people like yourself

the cost has been enormous.And we salute all - all of you young people we
salute people like yourselves, who

have paid that price and we - the fruit of your contribution is being
enjoyed by all of us now as we live in this

new dispensation.We hope I mean that we in the Commission may be able to
put some of these things to the

bodies that you referred to and try and ascertain what the various truths
might have been.We hope that having

spoken and told your story as you have told it, that there will be a
lifting of your spirit and the public sort of

acknowledgment which is a gift of the spirit, is a grace to be ready to
have spoken as you have spoken.That

somehow will have the effect of some healing for you, that there will be
a little lightning of the burden that you

carry and that maybe some of the nightmares might reduce.I don't want to
speak likely, glibly.But we hope

that there will be some curtsies in the telling - telling to people who
have listened with the very deep reverence

for who you are and for your story.Thank you.













12

UWC HEARINGS		TRC - CAPE TOWN

