TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 25 JUNE 1996



CASE NO:			CT/00249

VICTIM:			MZUKISI CATHNICK MDIDIMBA		

VIOLATION:		SEVERELY BEATEN BY AMASOLOMZI

AND POLICE	

TESTIMONY BY:	MZUKISI MDIDIMBA			



MR BORAINE:

Now having said that let me turn to you and say how very glad and
grateful we are that you have joined us. We are very pleased to see you,
we talked about age just now, and all I can say is without knowing how
old you are, that you are a young man and in 1986 when the story begins
of what happened to you, you must have been very-very young indeed and so
it must have been particularly pain full and traumatic for you.

	We want you to feel comfortable where you are, even though it is quite a
strain, to talk in front of so many people. But you are part of the
healing process, we need you to share with us your story so that other
people can also be healed and so that this should never happen again.

	So feel confident that you have a contribution to make, but before you
do so, I would ask you to please stand so that you can take the oath.



MZUKISI CATHNICK MDIDIMBA		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much, please be seated. Mr Mdidimba can you hear all right
on the earphones ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

Fine, then we can start. 1986 was a very-very bad and rough period in our
history all over South Africa, as well as in Zolani where you came from.
Do you want to tell us about what happened on that day, the 24th of May
1986.

MR MDIDIMBA:

We were at a funeral it was on the 24th May 1986 on Saturday. We
dispersed after the funeral, I went together with my uncle and we went to
winery - from winery we came back at 8.00 in the evening. I would like to
explain that our location is just below and the town is up a bit.

When we went towards our location we could see that there was a smoke and
the police searched when we met them and they said we must go further and
then we went to our house. I went to Zwelitsha that was where my uncle
was staying. 	We could see that the neighbours house, it was Mr Gqoki,
his house was burning. After 8.00 we could hear sounds of cars, vans and
hippos and I heard people next door and there was insults also I could
see that one of the neighbours was going passed it was Panie.

I looked through the window, I could see that Mr Nkohliso was next door.
Panie kicked him and he shot this man who was lying on the ground. I was
afraid and I closed the curtains and I was afraid that they would come
for me. We could see that it was door to door search, they were
proceeding towards my house. I requested that Konayisa should help me
because she was on the double bed and I wanted to get under the bed.

And then I felt that my aunt would protect me. They got in and they asked
where is Mathemba or Mzukisi, and he said he went out, they opened the
wardrobes, they searched and when they didn’t find me they said they will
take my aunt, they couldn’t hit my uncle because he was a cripple.

At the same they were hitting my uncle’s wife and they grabbing, taking
her along. They locked the door and they went away with the key, I think
it was about 12 or 1.00 am, I struggled to come out under the bed - from
under the bed.

I could hear a cry as I listened I could hear that it was my brother, I
thought that every commotion has subsided I opened the door at the
kitchen and tried to peep and as I went out I could see that Matroos has
also saw me, and he started shouting and saying there is Mzukisi. They
started chasing me because I ran out as soon as called out for the others.

They started chasing me as I got to the junction next to Bogat’s place,
there was - I could see another police van coming. I ran to the van and I
asked for protection. Hanson came out and he just grabbed me by the
scruff of the neck and he didn’t say anything and then the people who
were chasing took me from - he handed me over to them.

They started hitting me with the sticks and the sjamboks. I was assaulted
for quite a long time, I was able to run away I was bleeding this time.
They started chasing me again and they were hitting me as I was having a
big distance between them. Unfortunately I slipped and then I fell on the
ground. When I was looking around I could see that Panie was already next
to me I was afraid and then I ran again.

I felt that I should go directly to place so that even if I die I should
die in front of my family. I had to go past the house which was being
burnt down a day before. I couldn’t see properly because the blood was
just covering my eyes. On my way back home I could see Mr Maya and the
others, and they started hitting me again.

I felt that okay I should surrender and go to the police van, I went
there and I felt that it is safer in the van. When I got there I found
somebody who was already shot and who was also at the back of the van.
Panie came opened the door of the van, he grabbed me and pulled me out of
the van. They started assaulting me again - there was lot of them. On my
right knee dislocated and I felt that I was unconscious when I regained
consciousness I could feel that they were hitting me on my testicles and
one of my testicles ascended. I was taken to the police cells at
Robertson, the people who in the cell assisted me and they tried to
replace the knee cap and also to pull the testicles so that they descend
again.

There was lot of youths and then all of them were released I was the only
one who was detained further. I was together with the adult offenders.

DR BORAINE:

Mzukisi it’s all right take your time there is no rush. Mzukisi you went
through a very bad time and it’s very painful when you start thinking
back, so don’t hurry. When you ready, you can start again.

MR MDIDIMBA:

I didn’t stay in the juvenile cells - I was 15 years old at the time but
I was kept with the adult offenders. I didn’t receive any medical
attention.

After a few days there were some who were taking advantage of me because
I was weak and they started assaulting me and then I was taken to
hospital. That is where I got medical treatment through Sergeant Vatsha
who was at the hospital.

I would like - I have a poem which I’ve written sometime back, and I’d
like - I don’t know whether I’m allowed to read this through. The poem is
titled Alone.

ALONE

For the crime I haven’t committed

I was detained and convicted for 90 days and 90 nights Without trial in
solitary confinement and in solitary confusion Alone all alone.

With no one to talk to

No visits were allowed from my beloved ones

No visit was permitted from my beloved ones who knew my whereabouts.

Alone all alone.

Youths were being harassed

Parents were been restricted from gatherings and asking my whereabouts.

Expelled from school and positive campaigns

Alone all alone.

No priests were allowed

No advocates knew my whereabouts

No newspapers were allowed

No radios being permitted

Alone all alone.

Jail to jail I was used too

Silly questions and corporal punishment was everyday’s

bread

Interrogation and depression and harassment were my

comforters

Alone all alone.

Moon in face and wet blankets I was used to

Tears with no one to dry I was used to

Hostile questioning was ringing in my ears

Sjamboks and batons are my bosom friends

Alone all alone.

Alone in police custody

Human dignity being my dreams

Peace and reconciliation being my vision

But the spirit of my leaders ring as the bells of the churches

Forgive but not forget

During the night I start to bleed continuously

I prayed in anger they are coming

The roar of the AK47 in my ears were my comforters

Slogans and toi-toi was always in my dreams

They can do what they want with my body

But my soul and spirit will never die

Alone all alone.

I was harassed and I was attacked all the time even the time when they
took me away they started with my mother and they said they were going to
kill the bitch and the puff adder with its, would kill it with it’s
puppies and attacked my mother. And then they ended up taking me away
from my mother.

I’m appealing to the Truth Commission that if they can be capable of
doing so assist me to continue with my studies. And presently I’m a
person who’s always ill and I think that it is after effects of the
suffering. I have a child and I am unemployed. I would like to get
assistance. Thank you very much.

DR BORAINE:

Thank you Mzukisi. I would like to make a few comments and ask just
couple of questions, but first let me ask you can you remember when did
you write the poem ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

I wrote my poem in 1991.

DR BORAINE:

It’s a very moving account of your feelings during that very bad time, we
would be honoured if you give us a copy, could you do that ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes



DR BORAINE:

Thank you.

MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes.

DR BORAINE:

We will make that arrangement a little later on, thank you very much.

You mentioned that you are now studying, can you tell a little bit what
you are studying and what college you are in?

MR MDIDIMBA:

I am a director of the local groups, I’m writing, I’m a director, I’m a
playwright and I am writing poems. I am also an actor but I am not
studying formally.

DR BORAINE:

We can get more details about little later on. And you also mentioned
that you are not very well sometimes and that you have some medical
problems.

MR MDIDIMBA:

Ja.

DR BORAINE:

Are you receiving any medical treatment at all from a clinic or from a
hospital or doctor, or anyone?





MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes, I receive some treatment, Sus Luyanda who is next to me is looking
after me I am always attending Trauma Centre. They’ve made arrangements
with Earl Geritz so that I can get medication all the time.

DR BORAINE:

[indistinct] you have somebody who cares for you and is looking after
you. You also mentioned that you have a child, how old is your child?

MR MDIDIMBA:

Melody is four years old.

DR BORAINE:

And she stay with you?

MR MDIDIMBA:

No she is staying with her parents on the mother side.

DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much. I just want to ask one last question. You mentioned
that you were 15 years old and you were a juvenile but you were put
together with adults, which must have been a very bad experience apart
from all the beatings that you got.

And you said that you were assaulted and you were taken to hospital. Can
you remember - I know it’s a long time ago but can you remember which
hospital you went to and how long you were there and what - what special
treatment they gave you - anything at all about that.

MR MDIDIMBA:

During the time of my detention I was under Sergeant Bishop, I was
admitted at Pinelands the other time.

DR BORAINE:

Is there anything you would like to tell us, before I hand back to the
Chairperson ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

No, I don’t have any further explanation.

DR BORAINE:

[indistinct] to us in every way - thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you - any further questions - Denzil - Pumla Gobodo.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Thank you [indistinct] You explained your loneliness while you were
detained, I would like to ask - how did you manage - how did you handle
the situation?

MR MDIDIMBA:

It was very difficult, because at times when you were alone you will be
stressful. You would be afraid - you become withdrawn. You don’t even -
you didn’t want to hear anything connected with politics or even if the
person says Viva. You would be afraid because would associate with
assaults and the atrocities that you experience in detention.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

I’m going to ask you about some names that you gave us, there are people
who are making research, Chief Mabizela gave us some names who were the
members of the vigilantes, I would like to confirm if those are the same
people.

You mentioned Matroos, Kokoloi, the other one is Watu - is Panie - Panie
Klaas ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes, he is Panie Klaas.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Is Meshack [indistinct]

MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes, he is [indistinct]

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Is Ntuthuzelo Luthango?

MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes, Ntuthuzelo is Luthango.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

What is the name of Maye ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

He is [indistinct] I’m not quite certain



MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Where they all members of vigilantes ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

Yes

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you explain why were you chased by these people ? What did they want
from you?

MR MDIDIMBA:

I cannot explain, I cannot tell you what was happening.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Can you remember probably as they were working with the others ?

Or did they pretend to be the police ?

MR MDIDIMBA:

I think there is because I was a very active as a political organiser.

Because even when the house was burnt I was not even there.

UNKNOWN CHAIRPERSON

We thank you very much. As we are hearing the explanation and the
witnesses of people from old to younger ones - that’s why we won the
struggle against the apartheid era. That’s why today we are in this
position, that’s why we are able to reconcile.

We thank God that gave the youth support and you gave the support to the
community so that you - the youth can be the leaders of the country and
you can enjoy the fruits of the struggle that you were fighting for.

Each and everyone black and white we thank you a lot for your presence
during your struggle and the participation, we accept it. We do
understand your pain and we look forward hoping that we will help you a
lot. Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON:

[indistinct] to a news item that has been fairly prominent. As a
consequence of the various news reports circulating this morning about
the letter received by the Commission last Friday, I will read a brief
statement on the situation:

A lawyer representing twenty two members and ex members of the South
African Police has written to me saying that his clients are prepared to
approach the Commission with Amnesty applications.

He has told me their actions are supported by Mr Vlok and various former
Generals of the SAP who will accept where applicable collective
responsibility and also may also apply for Amnesty.

The lawyer has also provided us with the list of incidents to be covered
by the proposed applications. No Amnesty applications have been received
yet. Reports that Generals themselves have written to us, are not correct
and it is also incorrect that twenty Generals are involved.

The Commission will not at this stage provide any further details of the
letter. The lawyer who wrote to us have not yet had a reply whether the
news emerged which we regret and we would prefer to conduct discussions
directly with lawyers and not through the media.

We are determined handle this matter carefully and correctly

and we will of course be consulting with the Chairperson of the

Amnesty Committee, Judge Hussan Mall.

The potential Amnesty applicants will be treated in the same

way as any other Amnesty applicants namely in a

dispassionate and even handed manner. Thank you

Please stand and wait until the witnesses and their supporters families
leave.











