TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - 7 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00555/KAR

VICTIM:				SIZAKELE MBEKUSHE

VIOLATION:			SHOT AND KILLED BY POLICE

TESTIMONY BY:		MINA MBEKUSHE



MS BURTON

Michelle - Michelle you can take them - shame the [indistinct] things.

We call our next witness to the stage, Ms Mina Wana-Mbekushe.

ADV POTGIETER

Do you want the prisoner with her on the stage [indistinct]

MS BURTON

Can you hear me all right.

MINA MBEKUSHE

Yes I can hear you.

MS BURTON

Please could you stand then to take the oath.



MINA MBEKUSHE				Duly sworn states

MS BURTON

Thank you - you are very welcome here today and your son who is here to
support you - is that right. And your - your evidence - your testimony to
us today is going to be facilitated my Ms Seroke.

MS SEROKE

A good morning Ms Minah we welcome you and your son here today and we
would like you shortly to tell us what happened on this day of 14th of
December 1989.

MS MBEKUSHE

I would like to start to begin where I first suffered. In 1986 I was
arrested. I was detained and when I was - when I came out of prison, I
came out of prison in 1986 and I was arrested again and before I went out
of prison, they took my clothes outside the house and people took
everything I had. When I came out of prison I stayed with other people,
because my furniture was taken out of my house.

My son Sizakele Mbekushe told me that they had a youth meeting on that
day. He went out to the meeting on that day. At about five to six p.m. we
heard people singing - toi-toiing and we heard gun shots while people
were toi-toiing. After a while my sister’s child came in and said that my
sister is calling me. When I arrived there I saw my son lying down. I
called him Sizakele - he could not say anything out of his mouth.

I asked other children who were around to go out - and to go out and find
a car. When we arrived at the doctor in front of the OK, the doctor told
us he was already dead and we have to take him to the hospital. We took
him to the hospital and we came back. When I asked who shot my son, they
said it was Ketile.

MS SEROKE

Please be strong and take your time - and take your time. We will wait
for you.

MS MBEKUSHE

And I just woke up in the hospital. I didn’t know what happened and after
that they took me home so that I can arrange a funeral for my son. These
people were not arrested. People who killed my son they were not
arrested. Instead of arresting them, police arrested those who were
toi-toiing.

I was not sure exactly who shot my son. Between Ketile - between Ketile
and Thabo - I was not sure exactly who shot my son, but only the comrades
who were together with my son were arrested.

After the funeral, it was in December, in January I received a letter
saying that I should appear in court in the charge office. We stayed
there for a long time and after the court [indistinct] called me. And
when we went to the Magistrate, the Magistrate just said that he didn’t
know anything and the case just was suspended.

When I came out of prison, I did not get any employment, even now I am
not working.

MS SEROKE

So now you are telling us that when this was happening in 1989, you have
been in prison, you were in prison in 1986 - why were you arrested at
that time?

MS MBEKUSHE

It was due to the state of emergency - they said that we were terrorists.

MS SEROKE

After they arrested you, why did they took your furniture outside your
house?

MS MBEKUSHE

When we were in struggle, we boycotted the Rand. They took me to prison
and then they took my furniture out of my house when I was in prison.

MS SEROKE

In other words this was done because you boycotted the Rand and you were
not there. What happened to your children when these police took your
furniture out of the house.

MS MBEKUSHE

They all wanted to arrest me and my children.





MS SEROKE

This Ketile and Thabo who are said to have shot your son - what, who are
they and what are they doing?

MS MBEKUSHE

They were the [indistinct] at that time.

MS SEROKE

Why did they say they shot your son?

MS MBEKUSHE

They did not appear in court and they did not explain why they shot my
son.

MS SEROKE

Sizakele and other youths - were they throwing stones in the houses,
because Ketile and Thabo are said that they shot Sizakele because he was
part of the people who threw stones.

MS MBEKUSHE

I don’t know about that, because there was no court case or there was no
evidence given concerning that matter.

MS SEROKE

Was there - there was an inquest and a post-mortem was done and it was
done - that he was shot in the stomach, but the Magistrate said that
there was no one to be blamed, there was no one responsible for his death.

But is clear that Ketile and Thabo were the ones who shot your son. Who
is supporting you at home at the present moment.

MS MBEKUSHE

I am working at the office at the present moment and I am getting a
salary.

MS SEROKE

Do you have any other children who are still at school.

MS MBEKUSHE

Yes, I do.

MS SEROKE

How many are there?

MS MBEKUSHE

There are five. One of them is in Cape Town and the other one just
returned and the other one is in Kimberly and the two are here in
Secondary.

MS SEROKE

Can you still remember in which standard are they.

MS MBEKUSHE

The two - the two oldest are in Cape Town in the university. The one is
Mabute Mbekushe. The other is in Kimberley. The other one is in standard
nine. And the other one is in standard seven.

MS SEROKE

Who is helping you in educating your children.

MS MBEKUSHE

There is no one helping me, except the one’s in Cape Town. They are
having bursaries.

MS SEROKE

You say here you had a attorney Moosa. Is he the one who was helping you
in the case of Sizakele? Is this lawyer still around.

MS MBEKUSHE

Yes, he is.

MS BURTON

Ms Mbekushe thank you for coming to tell us about what happened to your
son Sizakele.

MS BURTON SPEAKS TO MR ROTHO AND THEN CONTINUES TO SPEAK TO MS MBEKUSHE

Ms Mbekushe is there anything else that you would like to say.

MR ROTHO

Are you asking me ma’am?

MS BURTON:

No I am asking Ms Mbekushe if she wants to add anything.

MS MBEKUSHE

Ketile ma’am is still around - he is walking around in De Aar.





MS BURTON:

Thank you - it is very, very hard for you to once again relive the loss
of your son and we thank you for coming to tell us about it. We have
noticed that during all the stories that we have heard of the activities
of people in the De Aar area, the membership of DARA and I wonder if you
yourself Mrs Mbekushe were a member of the women’s association which I
believe was also strong in this area.

MS MBEKUSHE

Yes, I was a member. I am still a member of a political organisation, the
ANC.

MS BURTON:

And Mr Rotho referred to the advice office that was being conducted in Mr
Pickup Tantsi’s house and so we are gathering together the threads of so
many organisations that were working hard in the area at the time and we
hope that that kind of leadership and activity is not lost to De Aar.
That people are still willing to work for the community. Even in this new
society we still need people who can help one another to deal with the
problems of today, even if they are different problems from the problems
of the past.

We thank you both all very much for coming today, for being with us and
helping us understand the truth of what happened in De Aar, thank you.



