
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 3 - WEDNESDAY 7 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00306

VICTIM:				COLINE WILLIAMS (sister)

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		DETENTION AND DEATH BY BOMB 						EXPLOSION

TESTIMONIES FROM:		SELINA WILLIAMS

					WILHELMINA CUPIDO



CHAIRPERSON: ... is almost in the middle and then to your right is your
mother, Wilhelmina Williams and on your left is Basil Snyers, welcome to
you.I assume that all three of you will say something.

SELINA WILLIAMS:

I am going to talk on behalf of the Williams family and Basil is Robert
Waterwitch's uncle and he is going to talk on behalf of their family.

CHAIRPERSON: Okay, will your mother not talk?

SELINA WILLIAMS:

No.

CHAIRPERSON: Not, okay, I just want to know who should be sworn in that's
the reason why I am inquiring.So in that case the two of you will be
testifying, Selina Williams and Basil Snyers, so can I ask you to stand
to take the oath then please both of you.

SELINA WILLIAMS			Duly sworn states

BASIL SNYERS			Duly sworn states

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much you may be seated.Dr Wendy Orr will
facilitate your evidence and I am going to hand you over to her now,
thank you.

SELINA WILLIAMS:

DR ORR: Thank you Chair and welcome to Selina Wilhelmina and Basil.Today
Selina you going to tell us about your sister Coline and in the past few
months, we've heard about a number of young people from the Cape Flats
like your sister, who took part in the struggle for liberation, who were
recruited by MK, some of them gave their lives for the struggle, others
were very-very badly tortured.We heard in our first hearings from Basil
about the death of Anton Franz, we've heard in these hearings about the
death of Ashley Kriel and the terrible torture of Mohammed Ferhelst,
Colin de Souza and Yazir Henry.They were all men, now we going to hear
about a woman who was your sister.Can you tell us your story and her
story. --- Firstly my sister was detained in 1986 and she was detained
for about 11 months.And then in 1989 on the 23rd of July she was - she
was killed in the Athlone bomb blast.Two people died in that bomb blast,
it was my sister Coline Williams and Robert Waterwitch.Two days later two
of Coline's friends approached us and told us that she died in the bomb
blast in the Athlone bomb blast.And we were told that we had to go - to
see a lawyer in Athlone Mr Moosa and from there they will escort us to
the mortuary.We went to the mortuary on the 26th of July 1989 and that's
where we've met Robert Waterwitch's family and we were asked to identify
the bodies of the deceased.When we went in the - in the mortuary, the
first body I saw was Robert Waterwitch's, and I passed on and I went
around to go and see my sister's body. At first my mother didn't
recognize my sister's body, but surely I did.Her - the reason why my
mother didn't identify her body was because her eyes was out - her eyes
was out of her - out of her sockets and it - something strange I noticed
is - the only thing that blasted in her face was her eyes.It was just
that her eyes was out - it was out of her sockets and nothing else in her
fast blasted, I mean your nose is your highest point in your face, so
when your face blows, that's the first thing to go.And that was strange
to me.And then we were escorted from that room out to another room where
we - our statements were taken.And what happened then is immediately as
we entered this room there was one policeman that was very upset about my
- about me being there, my presence.He asked me who I am and what I was
doing there and - but nobody took any notice of him and he got quite
upset because I am thesplit image of my sister.And he insisted on wanting
to know who I am, so I just told him I am Selina and but that wasn't
enough for him.And he was sitting there and he was getting all warmed up
and - well he was - he was really feeling out of place there and he was -
he was a disturbance in that room because they were busy taking the
family statements and what about the deceased and when last we saw the
deceased and then later on he was removed by his colleagues out of the
room.And that's also something we found very strange for him acting that
way.And at the time - ja we were asked to go back home and later that day
we would expect policeman to come around to our homes and get stuff from
the deceased.And that afternoon the police arrived at our home in
Bonteheuwel and they collected Coline's passport document and some - some
of - some documents.But they didn't - they didn't find what they were
looking for because I think they were looking for explosives and then
also at that time there was - we - we were very confused the family we
didn't know what was going on because at the mortuary the police told us
that Coline and Robert were responsible for their own deaths and
according to them it looked like they've blasted themselves.And they
almost wanted to let people know that it was a suicide.And on the other
hand there was also pamphlets from the ANC's side going around, having
different speculations saying that they might have been interrupted that
night and they might have been arrested before the time and tortured and
that the police could have been responsible for the bomb blast.And up to
today we don't have anything conclusive about that, and that's one of the
reasons why we came to the Truth Commission is just to conclude that
story, just to find out what really happened to my sister.And because the
police were also using it at the time it was the campaign was against the
October elections, the municipal elections.And at the same time Patrick
McKenzie was - he was using my sister's death - he was saying that my
sister was responsible for her own death and that MK, the ANC didn't
train their cadres properly and he was sort of smearing it in our faces
again.And because they campaigned against the October elections, it was
smeared back in our faces.And ja that's the reason why we came forward is
just to clear the story what really happened and ja and to conclude it, I
think that's all.

	Thank you Selina I am going to ask you a few questions then, and then
ask Mr Snyers if he wants to add anything.The time when Coline was
detained at Pollsmoor did she tell you anything about that experience
when she came out, what had happened to her in prison? --- When Coline
came from prison she was a very withdrawn person.She was very quite, she
didn't talk about her interrogations but she was very cool about it.She
just said she just want to go on with her life, she just want to leave it
there and carry on.And - but she never talked to us as family members
about it.And that's just the type of person Coline was, she never
discussed - she was very private.And she never discussed her
interrogations with us although she mentioned one interrogating officer
because at the time this guy was also interrogating one of - one of her
friends and she said oh! he was by me as well.And - ja.

	Do you perhaps know that persons name? --- It was Jan Louw.

	Did you know - did the family know at that time that Coline was a member
of MK? --- I did not know.

	How old was Coline when she died? --- She was 22 years old.

	And how old were you? --- I am 23.

	And when she died? --- I was 16.

	So it must have been a really awful experience to have to go to that
mortuary. --- Ja.

	Before we carry on I am going to ask Mr Snyers if he would like to add
anything on behalf of the Waterwitch family, so could you just pass the
microphone over to him.

BASIL SNYERS:

DR ORR: Basil as I said to you this morning you obviously can't get
enough of the Truth Commission because you've come back again to tell us
about the death of another young person and that's Robbie Waterwitch, so
would you like to add anything. --- Ja Wendy I came here this morning
because Robbie's mother - for two reasons that she gave me, was not
prepared to testify, since I acted on behalf of the family ever since
Robbie's death, she's as usual given me that task which is - which is
most uncomfortable on one - on the one hand but I am actually glad that I
am here because I didn't anticipate the day to be dedicated to women.So I
am here also dedicating it to Robbie's mother particularly.Hettie, his
mother is a very-very staunch Christian, a very staunch Roman Catholic
person, comes from a very well known Athlone family of that church and
therefore a great believer in the - in Salvation through that - through
that route.So her one reason was as she put it, she accepted God's will,
her God's will and the other reason I think if I can remember she said
she had to get on with her life, it sounds very similar to what Shirley
said earlier, and to what Zubeida and Selina's mother also had to
experience, that things had to - things had to go on.In Hettie's case,
she had another son, who was an invalid after I suppose about seven years
of his life, he suffered from muscular dystrophy.He died two years ago or
a year ago at the age of 20, ja just before his 21st birthday, which
ironically is the same age Robbie was when he died in 1989.So those are
the reasons that Hettie is not here.And the reason that I agreed to take
her place today is that this perpetuation I think of - of what I am
beginning even - even to be angry about, this perpetuation of a sense of
denial on the part of many people.A sense of almost arrogant denial of
the past, a denial of accountability, a denial of the fact that there
were those people who had to endure the suffering, the torture, the
death, the maiming on the one hand and there were those who had virtual
power over life and death.That the latter group for me doesn't seem to
show the commitment particularly to the TRC which has been structured
which has been created for that very purpose in the interest of ultimate
reconciliation.That doesn't seem to come through, that doesn't seem to
come across.I don't want to ask awkward questions to the TRC officials
here today, I think they have endured a lot of that in the Press and
public generally.But that can't be said enough, I can't endorse enough
what Shirley in particular says about - about this whole process.So I am
here to corroborate with Selina's story.The family certainly was not
aware that Robbie was a member of Umkhonto we Sizwe.I was not aware
personally, although Robbie was a member of the Belgravia Youth as they
were then called, the UDF Youth in Belgravia of which he became of the
pivotal leaders.Robbie was one of the students at St Columbus who was
responsible for the creation of the first Student Representative Council
at that school, a body which was denied that school for a number of - for
all the years before then to exist.Robbie was one of the pioneers to
establish an SRC and to link that SRC with other SRC's that had sprung up
during the period '85 to the present.So in a sense Robbie's political
consciousness was formed very much during that time.But what is
significant and I think this was also well documented, is both Robbie and
Coline's Christian commitment, because it was their Christian conviction
in respect of justice and values that enabled them to make that
transition from being ordinary high school students and after that
university students, or tertiary students to full time activists in the
interest of South Africa.So that it's not enough for Robbie and Coline
and others - so many others to have died for the very South Africa that
we - that we are seeing taking shape although it's slowly.It's not enough
for them simply to have died(indistinct) ... we should establish the
truth about how they died at least.

	Thank you Mr Snyers was there an inquest into the death of Robbie and
Coline? --- Yes there was.

	And what was the outcome? --- I think Selina said and I want to
reiterate that, that the State's finding was that they were responsible
for their own deaths.That they had died as a result of a bomb explosion.

	So the implication was that they were planting a limpet mine at this
particular venue and something went wrong and they blew themselves up,
was that the story? --- That - that was the State's story.

	H'm - I have nothing further to say at this stage, I'll hand over to the
Chair.

CHAIRPERSON: I think Selina wants to(indistinct) ...

SELINA WILLIAMS:

--- Ja I just want to add something.It's just months later after their
deaths was we received some goods from the mortuary which was leftovers
from the bomb blast, it was clothing and stuff that belonged to them like
bags and there was something that I mentioned to the police with my
statement, is that, that particular day Coline had sanitary towels in her
bag and because I passed it on to her and I saw her putting it in her
bag.And what happened is that months later after their deaths, when their
goods were returned, I found the sanitary towels back - back in the
package which the mortuary have sent us and something very strange about
it is that how could sanitary towels have - how could have - how could it
survive a bomb blast?

DR ORR: Thank you for bringing that to our attention.

CHAIRPERSON: Just - oh! you want to - you want to add something Mr Snyers.

BASIL SNYERS:

--- Ja just to support what Selina also said earlier I meant to mention
that when we went to the mortuary on the 26th of July 1989, the first
time that I had met Ms Williams and Coline - sorry and Selina, it was I
think in discussion with Selina and her mother that I had noticed, I
noticed the same policeman that Selina referred to, who for me showed an
unusual interest in - in her.And asking her questions and being a bit
unsettled, that I do remember because I got the impression that perhaps
this was - this was going to happen to the family of the Waterwitches as
well, maybe this was perhaps a tactic for them - of them to unsettle the
families in anticipation of an inquest that both families obviously were
beginning to press for.I thought I'd just make that point.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes well - well thank you for that, I was going to ask about
that.Have you got any idea who that was, the - this policeman that was
acting so strangely?

SELINA WILLLIAMS:

--- No he was removed from the room and nobody mentioned his name.

	And while you are talking, what was Coline doing when she died, was she
a student, was she working, what was she doing? --- She was a drama
student.

	Where? --- She - at the Joseph Stone Institution.

	And Mr Snyers, I assume that Robbie was also studying?

BASIL SNYERS:

--- Ja - ja at the time Robbie was a student at UCT, I think second year
BA-student.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, there no other questions I am going to ask Wendy
to thank you.

DR ORR: Before I make my final concluding remarks I would just like to
assure you that in fact our investigative unit is investigating the
circumstances surrounding Coline's death and I'd like to read briefly
from firstly our research notes and then our investigators notes.The
research notes say, at the funeral attended by 5000 people, that was the
funeral of Coline and Robbie, a pamphlet allegedly distributed by the ANC
MK's stated that both Coline and Robert were well trained operatives and
that it was unlikely that they died by their own carelessness.There was a
question as to whether their bodies had been placed at the scene after
capture and torture or whether they were trying to remove the bomb at the
time of the explosion.An inquest was held at Wynberg Court, but the major
part of the inquest had disappeared.Circumstances of the deaths may have
been a possible spiking of a land mine.Investigations looking for more
information are ongoing.And then from our investigators reports, it has
been established from discussion on and off the record with a person
formally employed by the Directorate ofCovered Collection, the DCC, that
Coline Williams and Robbie Waterwitch were part of a cell which had been
placed under surveillance by DCC personnel and further that the limpet
mine which is said to have killed the two activists, may have been spiked
by a DCC employee who had penetrated the cell.A senior official of the
SAPS has informed the investigative unit that the forensic report
concerning this particular incident needs to be closely scrutinized for
inconsistencies.And just a comment that the inquest conducted around the
deaths was in fact officiated over by the same Magistrate who officiated
over the Ashley Kriel inquest and we know what the result of that was.So
I would just like to assure you that we are indeed investigating this
incident and are giving it very-very careful attention and I do hope that
one day, we will be able to provide you with the answers and the
information which is obviously so desperately needed and so important to
you.And I want to pay tribute to the Williams family and the Waterwitch
family extended family for sacrificing their children and I do hope that
coming here today as Shirley said will be part of the process of healing
which will eventually be given to you.Thank you.



