TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 3 - WEDNESDAY 16 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00429

VICTIM:				HENDRINA KAYE

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	SHOOTING

TESTIMONY BY:		HENDRINA KAYE



DR ORR:

Middag Me Kaye ek sê welkom aan u en ook aan u vriendin Me September. Ons
is baie bly om soveel van Wolseley se mense hier saam met ons te hê. Voor
ons u storie hoor, kan ek u vra om te staan om die eed af te lê.



HENDRINA MAGDELENA KAYE 	Verklaar onder eed



DR ORR:

Baie dankie, Denzil?

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Wendy, Me Kaye goeie middag.

ME KAYE:

Goeie middag.



ADV POTGIETER:

You’re going to talk about the incident at Wolseley. You were not part of
the procession - you were just an onlooker. What happened to you?

MS KAYE:

I was very inquisitive and that is why I was there. When the people
started leaving the hall I was part of this crowd watching how the people
were leaving the hall. And suddenly those people started running. I also
ran and suddenly I just felt lame and I felt something warm running down
my leg. When I looked down I saw blood, when I picked up my skirt I saw
there was a big hole in my leg. I started crying and I struggled to get
home.

When I arrived home there was nobody there, I went to my sister-in-law
and she arranged transport to Dr Nell. When I came there, there were 2
ambulances standing there waiting to transport other injured people.

	The ambulance driver put a bandage around my leg and then we were taken
to Eben Dönges. We stayed there over night and returned the next day.
Thank you very much.

ADV POTGIETER:

In which leg where you wounded?

MS KAYE:

In the - my left thigh above the knee. I was hurt in my knee, there was
hole in my leg.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct]



MS KAYE:

They said I was hit with a rubber bullet. The children said the next day
that they picked up big things - big - big cartridges.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you see the person who was shooting at you?

MS KAYE:

No I didn’t see anybody because I was running away and then suddenly I
realized that I was feeling lame and I felt something warm running down
my leg and when I picked up my skirt I could see this big hole in my
right leg.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you run away from the police?

MS KAYE:

Yes, when everybody started running I also ran away.

ADV POTGIETER:

What is the situation with your leg at the moment, is it completely
healed?

MS KAYE:

Yes, it is fine except that when it is cold my leg aces.

ADV POTGIETER:

Are you working?

MS KAYE:

I work at SEPCO in Tulbagh during the season, it’s just for 5 months that
I have work and for the other months I have a char job.

ADV POTGIETER:

Does your leg give your problems when you go to work?

MS KAYE:

Not now, not like today but when it is - when the weather is no fine it
gives me a lot of trouble.

ADV POTGIETER:

So were you not involved in this demonstration, you just ran away when
people started running? Were you ever charged with anything?

MS KAYE:

Yes, 3 weeks after that we were arrested but the case was withdrawn. And
afterwards we made statements when we reappeared at court but after that
we never heard anything about this case.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you institute a claim at all, did you receive any compensation?

MS KAYE:

No nothing at all.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much, is there any thing else you which to add?

MS KAYE:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you very much for your evidence.

MS GOBODO:

Thank you Hendrina, do you have any children?

MS KAYE:

Yes, 4 children.

MS GOBODO:

At the time of the incident, where - where were they and - or - how old
were they? At the time of the injury how old were your children?

MS KAYE:

My youngest child was 6 years old - I think 6 years and the second child
- I can’t remember precisely but more or less 14 years old. And the 3rd
on - the eldest was 20 years - round about 18 and 19 years and the eldest
one was 20. And I was 40 years of age.

MS GOBODO:

[indistinct] were bleeding when you went back home, running, bleeding?

MS KAYE:

When I came home there was nobody there at my house. When they shot me I
just tried to get home immediately but there was nobody there to assist
me because everybody was just trying to get to their own homes safely. I
just tried to get home and there was nobody there when I arrived there. I
went to my sister-in-law and she arranged for transport to Dr Nell.

MS GOBODO:

It must have been very scary for you to be shot like that and to suddenly
find that your life is at stake?

MS KAYE:

Yes, it was.

MS GOBODO:

It’s very difficult [indistinct] under conditions of that nature where
you don’t know whether you will leave or not leave and whether you don’t
- where you don’t know whether a shot will injure you to death or will
nail you.

And we just want to thank you for coming today to share with us that
experience and to also open another window for us that into that little
town in Wolseley to be part of that group that shows us what happened in
Wolseley because often we do no hear any of the incidents that happen in
towns that are not centrally located. So we are very pleased that you
came to share with us what happened then, thank you.

PROFF MEIRING:

Madam Chairperson Dr Nell was granted a opportunity to attend this
sitting to come and give his explanation if he wanted to. It was
confirmed with him that he would be here at 3 o’clock this afternoon
because it was foreseen that the program would run until 3 o’clock this
afternoon.

When it was found that things were going a bit faster and that he should
arrive a bit earlier, he was telephoned and asked to be here before 1
o’clock this afternoon. It is impossible for him to be here and he cannot
participate in this today so perhaps once more I should read his letter
that he’s written to us which has been written to you. Read to you
already and if I may just suggest that the Truth Commission take the
matter a bit further with him and perhaps he’d be granted an opportunity
at another stage to come and comment on everything that has been said
today because it effects his practice and his - him as a person and
everything.

	I would like to read what was - what he - what he was written, it was
short submission which was written on a - one of his letterheads and he
says that:

I was a available on 24th of November 1990 and did not refuse

anyone medical attention. The patients were all taken directly to

Eben Dönges Hospital per ambulance and I only heard about the

incident on the 25th of November 1990.

I understand that there is going to have to be quite a bit of

clearing up with regards to this and that he should be granted the

opportunity.









