TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - TUESDAY 15 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00264

VICTIM:				STANLEY MANYEFANE

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	SHOT & KILLED

TESTIMONY BY:		KOLEKA MANYEFANE



DR ORR:

Ms Manyefane can you hear me?

MS MANYEFANE:

Yes, I can hear you.

DR ORR:

Can you hear my voice through the headphones? I would like to say good
afternoon to you and your daughter that you brought along today to assist
you. Before we listen to your testimony, I would like you to stand to
take the oath.



KOLEKA MANYEFANE		Duly sworn states



DR ORR:

I’ll now hand you over to my colleague that is going to assist you in
giving your testimony.

REV XUNDU:

Thank you Mr Chairperson, good afternoon Ma’am can you hear me properly?
You are Ms Manyefane, what is your clan name?

MS MANYEFANE:

What is your clan name?

REV XUNDU:

Maxhashu, what is your clan name?

MS MANYEFANE:

Mashangu.

REV XUNDU:

We have a report here ma’am that the unrest in this area caused the death
of your son Thembelani, could you briefly tell us what happened that day.

MS MANYEFANE:

It was the 19th of May in 1986 at about 10 o’clock perhaps 11 o’clock -
there was unrest along the Q-block. Both children and elderly people were
helping a UDF member to move. There were Casspirs casing our young boys -
Casspirs driven by the boers.

	I got a report that Thembelani was going the Q-block screaming. I left
my house running towards the Q-block - as I turned the corner where my
son had turned I saw him on a field, lying on his back. When I got there
he was still breathing but with difficulty. He was bleeding everywhere
from head to toe, I then turned back. The people that stay in my block -
the H-block - were waiting for me. I then called them.

	They could not hear me, I went closer trying to call them. Then a young
man, Petrus Mangena, came also my husband came. They then realized that
my child is dying.

REV XUNDU:

Excuse me ma’am. In this attack what does the report say, is - is it the
police that shot your son or the AZAPO?

MS MANYEFANE:

My shot was being cased by the police but it is the AZAPO children that
were standing next to him.

REV XUNDU:

Were the police taking photographs at the time?

MS MANYEFANE:

No, they were watching. I don’t know exactly what they were doing because
I was in absolute shock. But it was the boer police standing there
watching.

REV XUNDU:

Then your husband, Sydney, organized transport?

MS MANYEFANE:

Yes, he organized transport. Botes came with his transport, they then
left to go to the hospital. They asked me to - to stay behind.

	When they got the hospital my child was to injured and he had to be
transferred to the Tygerberg Hospital. I was there at the time and I
insisted that I see my son. He was under an oxygen tank at the time, it
is his head that was meagerly injured. There was internal bleeding on his
brain so he could not be helped.

REV XUNDU:

Was he taken to Tygerberg?

MS MANYEFANE:

Yes he was transferred to Tygerberg.

REV XUNDU:

Then you later ascertained that there was a difference between - because
he just - his health just deteriorated?

MS MANYEFANE:

The next day the Referent came to my house, I was already sleeping. My
husband was not there because they had to be on guard as the AZAPO wanted
to attack us. My husband and other men woke we up to tell me that my
child had passed away.

REV XUNDU:

Then there was a funeral Ma’am, is that so?

MS MANYEFANE:

There would be prayers - night [indistinct] but the police would
interrupt. We tried to continue with our prayers but the police would
come, demanding that there should be no prayers.

REV XUNDU:

How did the funeral go Ma’am, was it peaceful or were the police there?

MS MANYEFANE:

They were there but the community wouldn’t let them take over. The
funeral was delayed because they would not let us bury my son.



REV XUNDU:

After the funeral did - was there a court case?

MS MANYEFANE:

After the funeral I cannot remember how many days elapsed but the white
policemen came to my house. They were taking us to the Police Station to
make a statement. I was the only one at home, my husband was at work. I
asked what statement do you want, they said a statement in reference to
my late son. I said I’m not going to make a statement because a statement
is going to be made by perpetrators and the Lord.

	They said I - this is not acceptable, I must go and make a statement. I
did not go the first time, the second time when they came my husband was
there. My husband then said I should go, they wanted to know what I had
seen.

REV XUNDU:

After the statement was there a court case perhaps?

MS MANYEFANE:

No there was no court case, but after a long while - the following year a
car with a Cape Town registration came to my house saying that there are
people of the Law from Bellville. They came to tell us that we were
requested to go to Bellville. My husband did not go to work that day, we
drove to Bellville. At about 12 when we got there these boers said they
have called us to tell us that there is no case because they can not get
the perpetrators.

	Amongst these boers there was a police called Victor, these police that
were prosecuting us even after they had killed my son.

REV XUNDU:

What - what - what’s this police’s name?

MS MANYEFANE:

It is Victor.

REV XUNDU:

Victor has been mentioned in a lot a cases. Just reverting back ma’am,
Thembelani was 20 years of age. Was he at school or was he working?

MS MANYEFANE:

We was working sir.

REV XUNDU:

Where was he working?

MS MANYEFANE:

He had been working in a butchery.

REV XUNDU:

Did Thembelani have a pension in the butchery?

MS MANYEFANE:

No, there was no pension but what the employers did is to give a donation
to us.

REV XUNDU:

Did Thembelani have a child?

MS MANYEFANE:

Yes, Thembelani had impregnated a child. When Thembelani died this child
was 3 months old.



REV XUNDU:

What is our request to the Commission Ma’am?

MS MANYEFANE:

Since Thembelani died I have been of ill health. Thembelani has this
child, it the Commission can help me and Thembelani’s child I would
appreciate that.

REV XUNDU:

Have you finished ma’am, is there anything else you’d like to say?

MS MANYEFANE:

I also request that the Commission investigates about this case. The
court in Paarl and Bellville was not investigated in a satisfactory
manner. If the Commission could investigate for me and do what it can for
me I would appreciate that.

REV XUNDU:

Thank you, I will ask Wendy to read the results of the Investigation Unit
and then I will hand over to our Chairperson, thank you.

DR ORR:

I would just like to - to let you know that we have started investigating
this matter and our investigators have retrieved the Inquest Docket from
Bellville Court and I will read the result of the inquest in Afrikaans as
it is in the document.

The cause of death is stated as being a head injury when he was attacked
by a group of black people. This assault took place during the morning
and the perpetrators could not be identified.

As you say you are not satisfied with that so we will indeed investigate
this matter further as we do with all cases which are brought to the
Commission.

CHAIRPERSON:

Any questions?

MS MANYEFANE:

Yes, Mr Commission. I have been told that the people who had killed my
child are unknown. Even though after I made a statement in court I don’t
know but there were eyewitnesses there that gave me names. I included
these name in a statement, the statement that is in Paarl.

CHAIRPERSON:

Thank you ma’am, they will try to investigate this matter. Thank you very
much ma’am, may the Lord console and comfort you. The Commission will
endeavor to investigate this matter. Perhaps the information that you
have given us that you are not to well, perhaps we could present this to
our Precedent.

Maybe he can help you, as a Commission we do not have the strength or the
capacity to help you. We will however recommend to your Precedent that
somehow you’d be assisted. It will be our Precedent and the Parliament
that will give the final conclusion as to how you are helped.

MS MANYEFANE:

Amongst these AZAPO children as I recall this child is called Ivan but
this child’s name is in the statement. He is from the Q-block.





CHAIRPERSON:

Yes ma’am, I thank you very much for the statement. Our investigators
will go to the police and to court and try to retrieve the statement.
Thank you ma’am.



