TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2: 27 NOVEMBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00700

VICTIM:				SIMON MANDLA MXINWA

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	SHOT AND KILLED BY POLICE

TESTIMONIES BY:		IRENE N MXINWA [mother]

					

ADV POTGIETER:

With your permission then, I will call the first of the families. It is
Irene Nomazizi Mxinwa. Oh yes, let me just explain the use of the hearing
devices that are available. The device enables you to listen in on the
evidence in a language that you can follow. Let me just explain that -
this box section of the unit can be utilized, firstly to tune into the
language that you would like to listen in on and also to adjust the
volume of the set.

Now, the channels are as follows. On channel one you will be able to
listen in, in Afrikaans. On channel two you can listen in, in English and
in channel three you can listen in, in Xhosa. And then the second button
simply is to adjust the volume. Thank you.

And of course, we want to ask you, when you leave the hall to leave the
head-sets behind on your chair and not to take it with or out with you.
We need to have them re-charged, otherwise they are not worth much to us.

Ms Mxinwa, good morning to you, can you hear the voice over the
headphones?

MS MXINWA

Yes, I can hear.

ADV POTGIETER

Good, thank you. I am going to ask you to take an oath before you start
telling us your story. So for that purpose, would you please stand?



IRENE NOMAZIZI MXINWA 			Duly sworn states



ADV POTGIETER

Thank you, you may be seated. My colleague Mary Burton, will assist you
in telling your story to us.

MARY BURTON

Thank you Chairperson. Good morning Ms Mxinwa, it is me talking to you
here, can you see me, here.

MS MXINWA

Where are you?

MS BURTON:

How are you?

MS MXINWA

I am well.

MARY BURTON

We want you to be comfortable. So relax and you don’t need to feel there
is any hurry. Simon Mandla was one of the young men we have spoken about.
One of the one’s who was killed in March 1986. And you have spoken
before. Where you one of the mothers who came to speak to us a few months
ago?

MS MXINWA

Yes ma’am.

MARY BURTON

I just wanted it to be in the record, that is why I am asking you again.
But we all remember very well what you told us at our first public
hearing. And we remember the story of how those seven young men were shot
and killed - of the funeral that happened about 10 or 12 days later with
the tremendous attendance of the people from the community of six of
those men.

And since that time, when you came to tell us before, our investigating
team have been working very hard to try and find out exactly what
happened on that day. And we hope that today and tomorrow things will
become more clear and you will have answers to some of the questions you
have been asking for so long.

You told us then what you knew, about what had happened, but I wonder
whether you would like to tell us anything more or tell us what is on
your heart today.

MS MXINWA

On that day I was at work. I did not hear anything on that particular
day. I just knew that my child had been lost - he did not come back on
the Sunday evening. The incident was on the Monday. We searched at
hospitals. We thought maybe he might had been in an accident. We searched
in prisons. We did not find him the entire week.

What delayed the whole search was that I had lost a grandchild. The
following week we found him in a mortuary. I could not go myself, I sent
some people. My husband had also recently died. I had not yet healed, I
was still very weak. So I sent some people to go to the mortuary and they
found the corpse there. They took his ID to the mortuary, that’s how they
could identify him.

Well apparently he was one of the children who had been shot in Guguletu.
But I would like to know why it was that my son was shot. I do not know
why he was shot. I asked myself this question. It is still not answered.
Why did the police shoot our children? With no - for no apparent reason.
What did our children do that they deserved death?

MS BURTON

Thank you Ms Mxinwa - we hope - we hope that some answers will begin to
come forward to your questions. I would like to ask you, you mentioned
that Mandla did not come home to sleep the night before this happened,
the Sunday night. What about the nights before that and the days before
that - was he sleeping at home?

MS MXINWA

Yes, he would sleep at home.

MS BURTON

And was he working or was he going to school?



MS MXINWA

He was not working, he had just stopped school.

MS BURTON

And did you know his friends? Did you, the other people who were killed
on that day, did you know those young men?

MS MXINWA

No, I did not know them, because they all from Guguletu.

MS BURTON

I have no other questions.

CHAIRPERSON

Thank you, are there any further questions? Thank you very much ma’am. As
Mary Burton has already said, we trust that - that your questions that -
the questions that you have in your heart, will somehow be answered. The
Commission will try to investigate the matter, but we would also like to
re-iterate that we are with you. We will trust that the Lord will comfort
you and strengthen you.

We thank you for the contribution you made, because it is for - because
of such incidents that today we are a free country. Thank you ma’am.

