
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 2 - TUESDAY 6 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00407

VICTIMS:				TSHUKU FAMILY

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		FAMILY MEMBERS SHOT AND KILLED

TESTIMONY FROM:		THEMBISILE TEMPLETON BAM [nephew]



THEMBISILE TEMPLETON BAM		Duly sworn states

COMMISSIONER: Thank you very much you may be seated.Commissioner Mary
Burton will facilitate your evidence and I hand over to her.

MS BURTON: Thank you, good morning Mr Bam how are you? --- Good morning I
am fine thank you and how are you?

	I am well thank you, thank you for coming this morning.You are going to
tell us about things that happened to your uncle Solomon Tshuku who was
the ANC chairperson at Site C during 1991 and who is now deceased.So
you've come to tell about what has happened to his family in 1991, was it
- yes.So please go ahead and tell us what happened on that day in August
'91. --- In 1991 in August it was very late at night.Just before - that
was before midnight, just when it was about the early morning of the 15th
of August, there was an attack of my uncle Solomon Tshuku.What actually
happened was firstly that the attackers first locked the neighbouring
houses making use of the wires and this made it appear that they had
intention that whatever they were to do, was not to be disturbed by
anyone who would be coming out of this houses.So that they could whatever
they were going to do successfully.So they attacked after locking up all
the houses in the neighbourhood and they then put some of them so that
there should be some people taking guard.So they continued with what they
were doing, firstly if you could see what they actually did during that
incident, I would say the people who did all this are the people who had
full knowledge of that house.For the following reasons, the corpses were
found in some places and this is an indication that these people came
into - into the house through the side where my uncle's bedroom was.They
must of gone into the house through the window and the house - and the
door was locked.And perhaps they could not have managed to open the door
and then perhaps they may have decided to lock the door, making use of
wires.My aunt's body was found in the third room, he must of come from
her room and moved on to another room that was occupied by the male
children.The bodies that were discovered were that of my aunt and that of
her three year old child whose name was Nomanqulo and the body of a young
boy named Lundi, they were inside.Only one boy who had come from
initiation was still alive, but he was shot too.Another girl tried to
save herself by jumping over out of the window, which was at the back.As
she was jumping out of the window, she then bumped against someone who
must have been taking guard of people in that house at the back so that
they should - people there should not be coming out.And then this
particular person shot at this[indistinct] and that's how she died
instantly.Later a sister to that one who was seven years old, also jumped
through the window, but fortunately she was not shot.One of the men
sympathized with her, if that could be the case, and then we got it from
this child that he intervened and stopped them and said she was young,
surely she did not have any information, so that's how she survived.

	Sorry can I interrupt you a moment, sorry so they were five people
killed in the house? --- At the moment there were four corpses, the fifth
had not died but he died on the way to hospital.

	I see, thank you. --- After this attack, they decided to set the house
alight to and extend that even those bodies - those corpses as the house
was burning were left there inside the house.They leave us - got an
opportunity to come out and try and extinguish the flame, the fire and
the attackers ran away.And fortunately the bodies were not burnt, because
the neighbours managed to extinguish the fire and then they took the
bodies out of the house.It was later discovered because I was at work
that there was an attempt to call for an ambulance that could come to
help the one who was still surviving, but there was a problem that the
very same problem - the ambulance as it was driving towards my uncle's
home, just next to the Caltex Garage, just at Landsdowne Road, the
ambulance could not move on because it was stoned by the people and it's
unknown whether these were the very attackers or not.On that day, I think
the people - the total number of the people who were killed in Site C was
eight.Then I was from work when someone came to fetch me from home and I
got there to my uncle's house to find all the bodies lying there and
Mncedisi theone who was still living had been taken away already, because
the ambulance managed to take him away.There was a problem caused by this
incident, because my uncle was at work and when he came back from work
and he saw all the mess of the corpses lying over he nearly committed
suicide.He nearly hurt himself with a weapon that he use to use at work
was - he was working there a guard and this - that lead to it that he
should be under guard all the time so that he should not commit suicide,
to an extend that even at work, he had to be under strict guard and the
members of the organization use to go and watch him and try and keep him
company so that he should not think deeply about this horrible
incident.Later we got information that Mncedisi, that is the survivor had
died, so in all they - dead people - the death toll went up to five of
the same family members.Later the bodies were taken to the Government
mortuary and we were forced to remove them from the Government mortuary,
but before that we went to - to the offices of the lawyers, especially
the office of[indistinct] that is where we were, we talked to the lawyer
by the name of[indistinct] something like that.So he is the one who gave
us a letter that we took with us to the Government mortuary.I was the one
who was making sure that - who was trying to identify the bodies.I did
not look at the wounds that had caused the death, but what I noticed was
the bodies were burnt.I managed to look property at the body of the
youngest of the children.When I looked at her body, I noticed that she
had been shot on the neck and she was three years old, and I don't know
whether I could say that it is because of the attachment that I had
because I decided to observe her body.We then decided to control
everything and we had to bury them on the 1st of September and their
funeral is conducted in Namakwe in Transkei.So my uncle remained there in
Transkei for while and we came back to Cape Town, my uncle kept there for
the rest of 1991.But because of - of the fact that, that place is rural,
we do not - we do not have facilities like heaters, electricity, we go
and collect wood and so as to make fire for whenever want to cook.There
are no taps which are next to the houses, we have got to go and fetch
water from quite a distance and people have got to walk long distances to
go and fetch water.So he could - he could not survive under those
circumstances because he did not have a wife and he was left with this
child that he had to love and, and try and protect her so that he should
not think about the other's the mother and all those who had died and he
had to wash for him and also cook for him.And so because he was a man and
quite elderly person, so it was not easy for him.So he decided to come
back to Cape Town.Before he came to Cape Town, just at the time he was
there in Namakwa, I - a policeman came to me and he wanted to find out
whether my uncle had not come back from home yet.And his aim was to try
and investigate from him to know - to find out whether he did not have
any knowledge about the attackers.So I told him that I didn't know when
he would be coming back from home, and that was the time they had not yet
found the attackers.There is one other part I would like to add one, that
when I went to the Government mortuary to identify the bodies, a certain
member from there I had identified the bodies already and have signed all
the documents I needed to sign, then a certain man named Mr Farmer came
to ask me that I should sign some other papers, because those I had
signed previously had been lost.He also wanted to find out whether we had
not found these people who had done the incident, so I told him no, there
was no evidence whatsoever.So he left me with his telephone number and he
said to him if I had any knowledge I should contact him, this is what I
left out in my statement.Then after some time, after that policeman had
come to me, he left his address with me, that was an address of the
police station together with his telephone number, though nothing
bothered me there after and my uncle was still there at home in the rural
place.But before he came, I just can't tell what month it was.

	Don't worry too much, are you just going to find your notes, all right.
--- Then I received a letter from the Government that was before my uncle
came back from home, it was in October month in 1992 and in this letter
there was information that there would be a Court case on the 3rd of
September in connection with the death of Mncedisi.But there was also a
phrase that it was not necessary that I should be present there in
Court.But I did go to Wynberg, but unfortunately because I could not
locate the Court, the Wynberg Court at that time, I got lost to an extend
that I could not meet the writer of the letter.But after that since I had
already taken this matter to the lawyers, because as soon as I got this
letter, I informed the executive of the ANC which advised me that I
should take the letter to the lawyers.That is where I met Mr Moosa who in
turn handed me over to Mr Goitje.There after they informed that the case
has been transferred to Mitchell's Plain and that was the time when I
would get some invitation to - to Mitchell's Plain, but there never was
any case, they would say the case has been postponed, then up to date
there has never been anything.

	Mr Bam we can tell you our investigators have followed that up and there
was an inquest into the deaths of your family members, but it was found
that no-one - that somebody had been responsible, but they could not find
out who had been responsible.I know that you have some ideas on who could
have been responsible, although there is no proof so if you would like to
tell us what your feelings about that might be, please do. --- I don't
know whether - you are leading me with the aim that I should not tell you
how my uncle died and how he died.

	Your uncle died a natural death didn't he? --- I could - I am doubtful,
though he did fall ill, but the way he as sick I would say it was a
result of the incident that occurred to this family.The reason why I am
saying that is my uncle firstly as I have stated that he was a member of
the ANC, got quite some time, he was in prison for ten years and that
time he did not have anymale children and when he came out of prison in
1970 he had a hope, he had intentions as a man to have a male child.So
that when he dies his name should go on and also someone should also keep
the home.So when he got married and he got this two male children he had
that hope that his home would go on.But when these two male children
died, because they were killed, this made him feel that his hopes had
been shuttered, his home had not been built, because if you were to die,
then it would mean that it would be the end of his home.And so I think
this was the cause of his illness, because he had a heart condition,
which led to his death.So I cannot just simply say that he died of
natural causes.I would say it is because of the deep pain that he had
from this incident.So he died last year like that, so the only survivor
in the family was that one who survived during the time of the shooting,
and this child is just all by himself, by herself without anyone to look
after.And she is still very young, and she is just starting, she is a
teenager and this is the time when she should be next to a mother who
shall be guiding her through this period and through this age preparing
her to be a mother in life.To add one I would say this child hasn't got a
place to live in she goes on moving from one place to the other, because
she doesn't have proper accommodation, let me just simply say she hasn't
got a fixed place of[indistinct]Now the big problem is how is her future
going to be.Because her situation and condition indicates that if this
was to continue she can end up being just a street child.I would say this
is something that is forbidden that there should be some street kids, but
as far as I can see, I can see that this one can end up being one of
them.So this is my main concern.

	Mr Bam sorry I am going to have to interrupt you a little bit, I can see
how seriously you take this concern for your uncle's only remaining child
and I think that the very fact that you are here today is that you feel
the responsibility of the family to tell this story to us.We - we will
take careful note of Nomdumiso's situation and our reparations committee
will investigate more about that.But part of our job today is to try to
find out why these things happened.So if you will believe that we will
listen very hard to what you say about Nondumiso.I would like to go back
to the - the situations, the tensions in Site C which may have been the
reason for this terrible thing to have happened.I think that you told us
that there had been some tensions in the community and I wonder whether
you able to give us any more information about why it might have been
that this terrible thing happened to your uncle's family. --- I would
like to say firstly this incident that fell my uncle's family is very
difficult for me to say who was responsible for it and I suspect so and
so.But I would say I cannot rule out that politics were responsible for
all this.When I can remember it happened when the organizations were
unbanned, there were meetings that were convened by the members of the
Nationalist Party as well.And these meetings were - had an indication
that they were against the ANC.My uncle was present in one of those
meetings and he once tried to answer since it was in a meeting and this
meeting had not been convened as a Nationalist Party meeting, but we
could get the spirit that they were trying to fight against the ANC.This
was evident, but there was a spirit of some conflict.Again there was
another meeting, the first one was[indistinct] there was a second meeting
that was convened in a hall next to the taxi's, and again my uncle stood
up and spoke and whilst he was on the floor trying to answer, then there
was an applause for what he said and I think this is again what caused
some problems for him.So - but I still cannot actually point out at
anyone and say so and so did this.But I just can't see I have that
feeling that there was that negative spirit of some kind and some
conflict that was there amongst the people.My uncle was a chairman and
there is something that he disliked the most, certain things that use to
happen, he use to crash, some practices like for example if one of the
people would do something that was not acceptable to the community of
would have done something that he should not have done and then if he is
stopped and then the people would be forcing[indistinct] the person to
stop it or he would be thrashed.He would be against such practices.And I
cannot say by so doing perhaps this contributed to all this attack, I
really don't say, know what to say.

	That's fine Mr Bam, thank you that just helps us to understand the
context of how this happened or the context within such a terrible thing
happened.I think I will hand over to the chairperson and see if anybody
else wants to ask you any questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, any further questions?We thank you,
you've given us a deep and full information that is going to be of help
to us, to give us a better light so that we can make out what actually
caused all these incidents.We don't have words to say to you.We
sympathise with you and because of this bad incident of the death of five
people, and amongst whom were young - very young children and in addition
to that you also had to loose your uncle last year, and you therefore had
to look after the surviving child who is now a teenager and it would be
very funny if you wouldn't feel hurt about all this.So accept from us
this words to console you on this.And I would like to say to the people
they should see that liberation came about in a very difficult way so we
should not take it light and make it useless, thank you.Mary Burton
want's to [intervention]

MS BURTON: ... Mr Bam and also to say that we had a statement from
another member of the community about this case.And we just like to thank
Rosina Pikelwa Yelani for coming forward to give us her account of the
story as well, thank you.















