TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 8 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:			CT/00382/KAR

VICTIM:			NCEBA JOKA

VIOLATION:		SHOT & KILLED BY

KITSKONSTABEL

TESTIMONY BY:	FLOIT JOKA



MS BURTON

Good morning Mr Joka can you hear me all right.

MR JOKA

Good morning.

MS BURTON

Please will you [intervention]

MR JOKA

Yes.

MS BURTON

Good - please will you stand to take the oath.



FLOIT MAKWENKWE JOKA		Duly sworn states



MS BURTON

Thank you - please sit down. You have come to tell us about the death of
your brother Nceba Andrew Joka in November 1987. Please tell us in your
own words what happened. Please can you sit quite near to the microphone
so people can hear you.

MR JOKA

On the 14th of November 1987 I was walking down Neptune Street whilst
walking I heard a bang. But I ignored it because I was going towards the
sound. Then all of a sudden people were crying - crying - I then started
running.

	When I was at a passage - I came across Constable [indistinct] when I
reached the corner where the Dutch Church was, I saw a body - my brothers
were there and a whole lot of other people. When I looked closer I
realised that it’s my cousin Nceba. I then realised that it was
[indistinct] who had shot, I tried to run after him, but when I got to
the passage, he had already ran off.

	When I went back to the place where the incident took place, there were
even more people. There was also an ambulance - my cousin then had
already passed away. A child then picked up two bullets - gave them to me
together with a cap. We went to the ambulance and then the ambulance left
- he was taken to hospital - we went back home.

	We later realised that the police had detained some people - the eye
witnesses told us that my brother was trying to stabilise the situation
because the police were arresting people. He then got shot during that
time. These people were later released from detention. Then there was a
court case, we waited for the date, then we were given a date to go to
the Regional court this was all in Middleburg.

	Before I went to the Regional Court - this happened. Around the 20th of
November my brother had to be buried - the police then told us that we
cannot bury my brother during the weekend he had to be buried on a Monday
during the week. On that Monday it became clear that when the hearse came
to our township it was [indistinct] by the police. The elderly people had
then to go to find out what is going on eventually they hearse came.

	The police told us then that by one o’clock on the Monday everybody must
have dispersed. The priest that was handling our matters told us that by
one we should indeed be finished because otherwise he will be held
responsible. All around at the funeral there were police - they confined
us to a certain area.

	My aunt was staying with my mother, when we came back from the graveyard
we realised that my aunt was ill - she then was taken to the Richmond
Hospital. During the funeral we received a phone call. We got a report
that Hazel my aunt had passed away.

	The court case then had to start at the Regional Court - three of the
accused were found innocent - the attorneys then said they are going to a
inquest in Hanover, we also went with. When we got there, as the
attorneys left the Magistrate’s office - they told us that the case was
over. We asked how could this be we did not hear anything. They then said
if we want to hear - if we want a report - we should go to a certain
man’s house. The Magistrate apparently refused for the Court case to
continue - thank you.

MS BURTON

Thank you very much Mr Joka - so Nceba was your cousin - your brother
cousin is that right?

MR JOKA

No he was my brother.

MS BURTON

He was your brother - and the - your aunt was your mother’s sister - the
one who passed away.

MR JOKA

Yes it was my mother’s sister.

MS BURTON

And the person who was accused of having shot Nceba who was that?

MR JOKA

He is [indistinct] Mekile.

MS BURTON

And that is constable Mekile.

MR JOKA

Yes ma’am.





MS BURTON

Our investigators have looked into the statement that you made and they
have followed it up - they went to the police station at Hanover and also
to the Magistrate’s court and they examined the records and found the
inquest report and that agrees with what you have told us. That special
constable Mekile fired the shot which killed Nceba.

	But the finding in the inquest was that his death was not brought about
by any act or omission amounting to an offence on the part of the special
constable.

	The - you also mention that there were witnesses at the time - could you
give us their names please.

MR JOKA

The witnesses I know are the one who were accused.

MS BURTON

And do you know their names.

MR JOKA

[indistinct] Jack, Mxolisi Ntonze and Matoto Tsaka - the first two were
found innocent, this is the [indistinct] chap that I know.

MS BURTON

[indistinct] and thank you for giving us that information. The other
point that we note is that constable Mekile fired no warning shot for
instance he could have fired a shot in the air to warn people that he was
about to take some stronger action but it seems that only - only one shot
was fired and that was the shot which killed Nceba.

MR JOKA

Yes ma’am it is so.

MS BURTON

Thank you Mr Joka - I am just going to ask if my colleagues want to ask
any other questions.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

Mr Floit was there any conflict between Nceba and Mekile?

MR JOKA

I don’t remember any conflict between the two.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

Are you saying that there was conflict with Mekile and the other people?
Is that why Mekile was armed?

MR JOKA

The argument took place far from Mekile’s place he was not involved at
all - he was not part of it. According to my knowledge he did not emanate
from a house he was actually following the group.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

Was he following them had they not walked past his house?

MR JOKA

I do not think so, at least as I see things, his house is just to far off
from this street that we talking about.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

Before Nceba passed away was he a scholar or was he working - did he have
a wife.

MR JOKA

No he was not married, he did not have children either.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

Was he staying at home with parents?

MR JOKA

He was staying with my parents and my sister.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

Is your mother still alive.

MR JOKA

Yes my mother is still alive.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

What is she doing?

MR JOKA

She is not doing anything she just gets a pension.

UNKNOWN COMMISSION

Thank you.

MS BURTON

Mr Joka constable Mekile was a special constable is that what people use
to call kitskonstabels.

MR JOKA

Yes ma’am.

MS BURTON

And do you know the name of the Magistrate?



MR JOKA

No ma’am I don’t.

MS BURTON

That’s all right we can trace that - thank you very much indeed - is
there anything else you want [indistinct] Mr Joka.

MR JOKA

Yes there is. First of all I request a fair judgement, because when the
accused left the Regional Court they were found innocent. If there would
be a fair judgement I would be at peace, that is all I ask for.

MS BURTON

We can understand that [indistinct] that justice has not been done - it’s
sometimes very difficult when records have been destroyed to go back and
retrace the steps of legal processes that have happened. We have done
what we can to check the inquest records and we will see if there is
anything further that can be done to establish what you clearly feel are
the true facts which have not yet come out.

	But we hope that you will also have some comfort and conciliation in
having been able to tell what you believed to have happened - thank you
very much indeed.

	Sorry just one last question is Constable Mekile still in the police and
still in this area?

MR JOKA

He is no longer in this area, I don’t know whether he is still under the
Police Force.

MS BURTON

Thank you very much.

MR JOKA

Thank you.



	







