
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	UWC HEARING - DAY 2 - TUESDAY 6 AUGUST 1996



CASE NO:				CT/00804

VICTIM:				SIBULELO GLADSTONE PILISO [son]

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		SHOT AND KILLED BY POLICE

TESTIMONIES FROM:		SIGNORIA DYANTYI PILISO

					KAYA SHEPHARD NDEVU



COMMISSIONER: And Ms Piliso as well.

SIGNORIA DYANTYI PILISO		Duly sworn states

KAYA SHEPHARD NDEVU		Duly sworn states

COMMISSIONER: Mary Burton will facilitate your evidence, I hand over to
her.

MS BURTON: Thank you, good afternoon to both of you. --- Good afternoon.

	Before you begin, just for the sake of the people who are in the hall
who might not be able to hear you speaking in Xhosa. Let me just tell
everybody what you are coming to tell us. The story is of the death, the
shooting to death of Sibulelo Piliso who is the son of Mr Piliso at the
end of 1990 in Khayelitsha. And Mr Ndevu was both a witness to that
shooting and was himself injured by the - by shooting in the same
incident. So they are now going to tell us about that, Mr Ndevu will you
start and tell us about what happened on that day.

KAYA SHEPHARD NDEVU: On the 13th in 1990 I was coming from work and it
was at about eight and when I got home, Sibulelo Piliso came to my house
because I had called him in connection with a job because there was a
vacancy. So - Sibulelo came and knocked and went into the house. And he
said he is responding to my call, I said I had asked him to come to me in
Town, but he said he could not, because he did not have money. So I gave
him R10-00 to go and get chance so as to get R5-00 from the R10-00.
Whilst I was still sitting there we heard a sound on top of the house and
I stood up and went to the door and opened the door. I saw two men who
[indistinct]] towards the house. One of them spoke as he was appearing
and asked we were burning their houses. But before I could answer he then
shot me on the stomach and I fell down. And I had again heard some noise
because I was shouting that people should come to our rescue, because
they were shooting us. They kept on shooting, I heard the sound with the
guns, and I could hear another sound then they were shooting Subelelo and
they shot him to death. That was the last I can recall. Because I was
lying there crying. So that is what happened. When I gained consciouness
party in Khayelitsha Hospital, in Khayelitsha, I wasn't aware what had
happened to Subelelo. Then I was transferred to Groote Schuur Hospital
and then I was - I had to undergo an operation. It took me days to
recover and to be conscious of the people around me, then I don't know
what actually happened thereafter. What I actually saw was when I
regained consciousness was to see a certain woman that has a child with
me, who had visited me and had heard news that I had died, but later
learnt to know that I was still alive, but I was in hospital. Then I
explained to her that these two people came and they threw something on
the roof of the house and I opened the door to find out who were the
people. These were people I knew, and then they started shooting, that
was all. So that's the end. So I was in hospital for some time and no
police came to me whilst I was there. I was in hospital for quite some
time and discharged in 1992 because I kept on going back being
discharged, or being admitted. I have got three operations, one is here
in the stomach, two of them and then on the other side of - they had to
take out a kidney because it was damaged and I was ultimately discharged
in 1994. Whilst I was - I was being admitted and discharged, I went to
[indistinct] and to see a lawyer and to [indistinct] a claim. I waited
until - until I had to pursue the case and I went to Wynberg where they
investigated to try and get the people who had trying to kill us. And
these people were not, were found not guilty. I don't know the reason for
that, because when they were going to give the verdict, they asked us to
go outside. When I asked the prosecutor why, they said the reason why
this person was not found guilty was that I had said there were two of
them and yet here in Court only one made an appearance. So that was the
main reason therefore why this person was not found guilty. The I said
but there are two names written down and I am not a policeman to go and
fetch the second one, who's name has been mentioned and I was asking why
they wouldn't go and fetch the other second person. So the prosecutor
could not answer. Then I said, I asked them if I was to be the one to go
and fetch them, I said to them but I am not a policeman and there are
policeman to do that job. So I don't know what I was expected to do. So
that's the end of my explanation.

	Thank you Mr Ndevu, do you - do you remember the name of the lawyer that
you went to. --- Yes I still remember I know his name is Motana
[indistinct]

	Thank you very much, we can - we can follow that up, now [intervention]

--- Can I just say that he gave me the statements because I had demanded
for statements from him and so these were given to me. I took the
statements because I wasn't aware how to approach the Commission. So I
went to Minister Yengeni en gave the statements to him so that he could
present these to the Truth Commission and for the Truth Commission to
look into how this - the claim was done by the lawyer. So I kept on going
to his office and I did not find him up till now I haven't found him.

	Thank you - thank you very much. I wonder if you would then pass the
microphone to Ms Piliso.

SIGNORIA DYANTYI PILISO:

MS BURTON: Ms Piliso you heard the story that Mr Ndevu told is there
something more that you want to tell us. --- Yes there is, the time we
went to Court and we felt dissatisfied, there was a special branch who
was involved in this case. Who said we should not worry because there
could be a review of this case later. He had made Photostats at the time,
there was the death - before their bodies were taken away by the police.

	So you still feel that you don't - you haven't been fully satisfied by
the legal process? --- No I was dissatisfied.

	We will - we will see what can be done to follow up and see if there is
more that can be discovered which might help you with a claim. But I
think it would be helpful for us to know what could have caused this to
happen. Was their tension and conflict between Sibulelo and other people
in the community, why should this have happened. --- There was no
conflict between these people and Sibulelo. But on the other hand I can
say there was because there was a fight between ANC and ME there was a
car that had been burnt, which [indistinct] to the Council so the police
had said people should not move at night. But it so happened therefor
that they were shot in the house, they had not gone out of the house. And
the person that I referred to was working in an office there.

	In the Council. --- Yes.

	That's the Llingelethu West Council. --- In Llingelethu West Council.

	All right and Sibulelo was he known to be an active member of the ANC or
any other organization? --- All of us as blacks we were ANC supporters as
we are still supporting the ANC presently.

	Thank you, I have no more questions at the moment.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, any questions? We thank both of you as the
Commission and we are suppose to investigate and find out the truth and
get deep into it. We are therefore going to make our best efforts to - to
get what actually happened and also to find out why this matter was not
perused, what actually happened. We therefore thank you.



















