TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - MONDAY 12-8-96



CASE NO:				CT/00358

VICTIM:				SIDNEY YABO

NATURE OF VIOLENCE :	SHOT BY KITSKONSTABELS

TESTIMONY FROM:		SIDNEY YABO



MS BURTON:

Good afternoon, Mr Yabo.

MR YABO:

Good afternoon.

MS BURTON:

We’re al of us seated across the table in front of you. We hope you’re
comfortable, can you hear all right?

MR YABO:

I can’t.

MS BURTON:

No?

MR YABO:

Can I speak Afrikaans?

MS BURTON:

Can you hear me all right?

MR YABO:

Ja.

MS BURTON:

Right, I hope you feel comfortable. We’re all seated across the table in
front of you and if you sit where you are now, you - the microphone is in
front of you so we will be able to hear you. Please will you stand now to
take the oath.



SIDNEY YABO			Duly sworn states



MS BURTON:

Thank you very much.

UNKNOWN:

Bietjie voorentoe, skuif voorentoe. Okay, okay.

MS BURTON:

Adv Denzil Potgieter is going to assist you to tell us your story.

ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you, Mary. Mr Yabo, can you understand me when I speak Afrikaans. I
hear you - you made the oath in Afrikaans, so I’ll speak Afrikaans to
you. I’ll facilitate your evidence and this - in the story you are going
to tell. And I would also just, once again, like to say - like Mary
Burton said to you - I would like to reiterate the welcome that she
expressed.

Your story takes us back to the situation in Beaufort West, during a
short period of a few months, when kitskonstabels were working here in
the residential areas. And earlier this morning we received a background
picture from Joyce Seroke about the situation in Beaufort West at the
time where kitskonstabels were patrolling the areas, and your story is
once again going to take us back to those incidence.

You, in fact, were the first victim of five - first of five victims which
Joyce Seroke referred to who were either killed or seriously injured
during the reign of the - of terror of the kitskonstabels, so we are
going to listen to your evidence now, which is about a shooting incident
on the 20th of June 1987. So I would like to begin by asking you to
explain to us what happened on the 20th of June 1987.

MR YABO:

Can I start?

ADV POTGIETER:

You may.

MR YABO:

We came from a nightclub and were on our way home - it was approximately

9 o’clock that evening. On my way I heard a shot and started running. I
was [indistinct] - taken to the hospital at Beaufort West - I was in Cape
Town for 3 weeks and they came to fetch me in a police van and locked me
up for two days, at the Police Station. Then they came to fetch me and I
was released on free bail.

The trial continued for approximately a year and there were allegations
that I had burnt someone’s house and then the case was finalizes on the
17th of May 1988. A claim was instituted - I’m not sure what the amount
was - and the attorney representing me gave me R12,500-00 but I haven’t
received anything beyond that.

ADV POTGIETER:

The interpreters found that - unfortunate a bit difficult to hear. If -
if the Commissioners could assist the victim. We’ve missed that last
answer from the person. I’m going to ask - I’m going to ask you to
perhaps - with Paul’s help - just move a little bit closer to the mike
because people in the hall might battle to hear but also the interpreters
so that - that might have a problem to interpret, so maybe can you just
sit a little bit closer.

I’m going to ask a few questions to you so that we can get this story
complete from you. You say that it was on the 20th of June 1987, at
approximately 9:00 p.m. the evening, when this shooting incident took
place. Is that correct?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Where did this happen?

MR YABO:

At KwaMandlekosi location.

ADV POTGIETER:

Could you just repeat that please?

MR YABO:

In the location.



ADV POTGIETER:

Were you on your way home?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Were you walking by yourself?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Do you know who - who shot you?

MR YABO:

I heard afterwards that James Mbami had shot me threw the window - he had
shot me threw the window.

ADV POTGIETER:

And when you were shot, did you walk past he’s house - were you walking
past he’s house?

MR YABO:

Yes, I have to past he’s house in order to get home.

ADV POTGIETER:

So it I understand your evidence correctly, you were merely walking
passed James Mbami’s house when he shot at you threw the window?

MR YABO:

Yes.



ADV POTGIETER:

How old were you at the time, in 1987, how old were you? Can’t you
remember, well that doesn’t matter. Were you working at the time?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you didn’t have any health problems at the time?

MR YABO:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

So, you were shot and you were taken to the hospital and you say that
afterwards you were taken to Tygerberg Hospital in Cape Town?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did - were you operated upon?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Which part of your body?

MR YABO:

My eyes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Both your eyes?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

So they removed both your eyes?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Were you shot in the face?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And what did they say to you what - what type of weapon was used?

MR YABO:

These long weapons of theirs - these which shoot the pellets - the
shotguns - rifles.

ADV POTGIETER:

You were shot with a rifle?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you say that when you were finish at Tygerberg Hospital, you were
arrested?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

What for?

MR YABO:

For public violence.

ADV POTGIETER:

For public violence?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

What do they say, what had you done?

MR YABO:

They said I was - I was recent when this person’s house was attacked.

ADV POTGIETER:

Was this person’s house attacked?

MR YABO:

I don’t know, when I passed there it was quiet.

ADV POTGIETER:

And there was a court case. Did James Mbami give evidence in Court?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And what did the Court have to say about his evidence - did they reject
it?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you also give evidence?

MR YABO:

Yes, I also did.

ADV POTGIETER:

And did the Court except your evidence?

MR YABO:

Yes - no.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you lay a charge against him?

MR YABO:

The attorney did.

ADV POTGIETER:

Did you not lay a charge against him at the Police Station?

MR YABO:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

And you say that there was some money paid out in this case?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

To - against whom was the claim instituted - against the State?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

And how much was then paid out to you?

MR YABO:

R12,500-00.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is this the money you received?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

But how much did the State actually pay out?

MR YABO:

R150,000-00.

ADV POTGIETER:

And was this money paid to the attorneys?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Which attorneys were these?

MR YABO:

E Moesa

ADV POTGIETER:

What did they say about the balance of the money, what did they say where
was it?



MR YABO:

Monkey told me that the money was invested in Cape Town and that every
month he would bring me some money.

ADV POTGIETER:

When was this money paid out?

MR YABO:

He came to give me on the 10th of February - he gave me this money.

ADV POTGIETER:

When last did you speak to them?

MR YABO:

I don’t always get hold of him.

ADV POTGIETER:

You - of - did you try phoning him?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

When last did you get him on the telephone?

MR YABO:

A few months ago.

ADV POTGIETER:

Has it been longer than that?

MR YABO:

Yes.



ADV POTGIETER:

This James Mbami - who shot at you - where is he now?

MR YABO:

He shot himself.

ADV POTGIETER:

When?

MR YABO:

I think it was last year.

ADV POTGIETER:

So I accept that you’d like the Commission to investigate the matter
regarding the money that is due to you, so that we can find out from the
attorneys what happened to that money? I except that you have need for
the money. You’re not working at this moment, is that true?

MR YABO:

Yes, I’m not working.

ADV POTGIETER:

And in fact you can’t work again in life.

MR YABO:

No, I can’t.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is there anything else that you’d like to ask from the Commission, or
that you’d like to tell us?

MR YABO:

No.

ADV POTGIETER:

Is that all you’ve wanted to tell us?

MR YABO:

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER:

Okay, thank you Mr Yabo. Thank you, any questions from the Commissioners,
Mary Burton.

MS BURTON:

Mr Yabo, I would like to know whether you’re receiving a disability grant?

MR YABO:

Yes.

CHAIRPERSON:

Any other? Sidney, we thank you for your presents here and we thank you -
we thank you for coming to talk here and we sympathize with you and we
also feel for you whiles walking down the street you had to be shot.

We are going to try and hear from your lawyers as to - as to what
happened to the - balance of the money. As I said earlier, that - there
are many who have suffered but what can give hope is that what they
suffered for they have gained for it, because here we are now we have
gained freedom that we have been wishing for. So you also have a
contribution into this freedom through the pain you have suffered.

We all wish therefore that you could have seen all the beautiful things
that happened like the inauguration of Mr Mandela as the president, but
unfortunately you couldn’t see all that because your eyes were removed.
But though you don’t express it, but in you heart you still know that he
is president and you even say you have also made a contribution with your
eyes until we are here in this level.

I now hear you saying you can never work again, but there are many people
who are blind but learn a lot. Now don’t you want to try and learn
something because I know of those who’re telephonist, et cetera and many
other things.

MR YABO:

I will.

CHAIRPERSON:

What do you say? I say I didn’t hear your answer and because you said you
were no longer going to be able to work. Now I’m saying there are many
blind people - even in our office in Cape Town we have our - a
telephonist who is like you - he is blind to - therefore I’m asking you
whether you do not have any wishes to do some studies, so that you can be
able to work for yourselves - self. Okay, you’ll think - you’ll think
about this.

I must remind you about people like Stevie Wonder - perhaps you can also
sing, don’t - can’t you play a guitar?

MR YABO:

No, I can’t.

CHAIRPERSON:

Okay, we therefor thank you, Sir.

