TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 11 JUNE 1996



CASE NO:			CT/00141

VICTIM:			IZAKIEL MOKONE

VIOLATION:		SON KILLED BY HAND GRENADE

DURING MARCH

TESTIMONY BY:		ELIZABETH MEADE MOKONE



MS SOOKA:

Could we have some quite please - could Ms Elizabeth Mokone please come
to the witness stand. Ms Mokone can you hear me? We’d like to welcome you
to the hearings at the Truth Commission, could you tell us who the person
is that is with you so that we could welcome him to.

MS MOKONE:

It is my husband Abel Mokone - it is my husband.

MS SOOKA:

Could I ask that you’d be quite in the gallery, I do not want to be
forced to ask that, that area be cleared, but if we want to give people
an opportunity to tell their stories, then we need to be absolutely
quite, thank you.

	Mr Mokone - Ms Mokone will you please stand so that we can - you can
take the oath.

ADV POTGIETER:

We’ll do it in Afrikaans - you are Elizabeth Mokone.



ELIZABETH MEADE MOKONE		Verklaar onder eed



ADV POTGIETER:

Thank you Ms Mokone you may be seated.

MS SOOKA:

As is customary we have appointed a Commissioner to assist you with the
leading of your evidence. He is Commissioner Dumisa Ntsebeza who is
sitting on my left hand side and he will take you through your story.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Good afternoon.

MS MOKONE:

Good afternoon.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Ms Mokone as you’ve heard my Afrikaans is not to fantastic, so I’ll speak
to you in English. Now Ms Mokone firstly I would just like to say yours
is a sad story also. Because it is about the loss of a loved one - a son.
And I would like merely to echo the words of Commissioner Sooka that you
are welcome here and I would like you to relax and as far as possible to
tell your story as full as you can.

Firstly I would like us to hear about yourself, where you grew up, where
you worked, how many children you had and then you could then start to
tell us about this fateful day when you heard about the death of your son.

MS MOKONE:

I'm Elizabeth Mokone, I'm married, I have three children. I live in
Vergenoeg. It was on the 25th of May 1993, I went to a funeral - my son
was on his way to school. When I came back from the funeral and I asked
if my son is not home yet and they said no. And I sat and waited and at
about 4 o'clock I asked one of his friends haven't you seen him yet and
they said no.

About half past four there was a knock on the door, it was Ms Ruth
Mompati the General Mokaba and other people I don't know their names.
They told me that there have been in a march in town and there was a bomb
explosion and my son had been killed in the explosion. I went with them
to Transvaal Road and I identified my child there - he had a mark on his
chest, quite high up on his chest - his T-shirt was full of holes - were
full of holes and his face as well had marks and holes, and we then went
home again.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Do you still remember the date on which Ruth Mompati and Mokaba came to
you, was it the - was it on the same day that there had been a march, the
25th May 1993?

MS MOKONE:

Yes, Ruth Mompati and General Mokaba came to me on the 25th to come and
tell me about my son's death.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

What I wanted to find out, were you told about your son's death on the
very day that he died?

MS MOKONE:

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now what was the occupation of your son, was he a teacher?

MS MOKONE:

He was a scholar.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now after you had seen your son's body what happened then thereafter -
after you had identified him at the mortuary?

MS MOKONE:

We went home, and people came to us on the 27th - ANC people and they
told me that they would share the burial expenses half of it they would
pay and we waited and waited and they never arrived. And the week after
that on the Tuesday evening there was a night vigil in a tent and while
we still sitting there we saw people running into the house - tear gas
had been release in the tent and the people ran into my house - also into
my backyard and there was lot of damage caused. And the next morning we
were told that the soldiers had used tear gas and these people never
arrive and we then just carried on and buried my child.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Now, you have told us that Ruth Mompati and Mokaba came to tell you that
your son had died because there have been an explosion during the march
there.

MS MOKONE:

Ja - ja.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Did they tell you how that explosion had come about ?

MS MOKONE:

No, they didn't.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] had come to know how the explosion came about as you sit
there today.

MS MOKONE:

I read in the newspapers and that's how I found out that - and after the
funeral I read in the newspaper again that the matter was proceeding and
there would be court case. I went to court and I went to listen to the
testimony and to the case.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] who were charged and what was the outcome of that court case
if there was any?

MS MOKONE:

I saw in court that it was Nkosinathi and Sipho Mbaqa and I also heard
afterwards - I didn't go to court on the last day but I heard that they
were given twelve years imprisonment but I wasn’t there.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] and now those two people - do you know where they are now -
the people who were in court on the day that you went who were being
charged with the death of your son.

MS MOKONE:

I saw them, I think they still in prison.

UNKNOWN:

The interpreters cannot hear the person.

MS MOKONE:

I think they still in prison.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] or perhaps it is difficult for you to answer the following
question, but can you tell us how you felt when you first heard about the
death of your son?

MS MOKONE:

It was very-very painful I still can't actually believe it, I still can't
believe that it happened. That - that morning when I left home he was
still there and he was on his way to school and that was the last time I
saw him afterwards I was just heard that he was dead.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

It’s okay ma’am take your time it’s okay. What would you have felt should
have been the attitude of the ANC towards your family which have at least
relieved you or eased your pain or don’t you have any feelings or
attitudes towards the organisation?

MS MOKONE:

No.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

In your statement you said you were promised to be assisted with funeral
expenses by the ANC, is that correct?

MS MOKONE:

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] also made the point that you never got those expenses is
that correct?





MS MOKONE:

Yes nothing-nothing happened.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

If it is possible for the Commission to do anything what would you want
it to do?

MS MOKONE:

I would appreciate if the Commission could help me in some way because
those told me they would come to me and help me with expenses but nothing
happened it’s now three years and nothing has happened.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Anything else that you would like this Commission to assist you with if
possible.

MS MOKONE:

We would like to know who the people were because there's some many
confusing stories. I would - I would like to know who did this to my
child.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

There are so many confusing stories, you free to speak out what you have
heard whether it is true or not because that will ease your pain. Because
if you bottle up anything inside you, you will never find peace. What is
it that confuses you - what are the stories further than the fact that
two people were charged, is there still another story?

MS MOKONE:

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Okay.

MS MOKONE:

Sometimes you just hear no it wasn't them, I can't actually explain.



ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] who it was that it was said it is.

MS MOKONE:

No.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] that true that it wasn't them, it was somebody else, would
like to know?

MS MOKONE:

No, I didn't actually hear that there was somebody else.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

[indistinct] then just finally if in any event there are more stories to
be told in order for the truth to be known - you would like that to
happen, is that right?

MS MOKONE:

Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA:

Thank you - thank you ma’am.

MS SOOKA:

Do you have any questions. Thank you Ms Mokone - we know that your story
is also very-very painful. You’ve you lost your son in the flower of his
youth, we do hope that we will be able to assist you to find out what
actually happened. As you know the people that you’ve named in your
statement are present here today and will also be giving their versions
of what actually happened. We wish to thank you and your husband for
coming forward to the Commission and we hope that as you listen today
some of the pain will go away, thank you.





