TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 8 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:			CT/01301

VICTIM:			SIMONI ZONO

VIOLATION:		SHOT & KILLED BY POLICE

TESTIMONY BY:	NTSOKOLO ZONO



MS BURTON

Good morning Mr Zono - can you hear me well.

MR ZONO

Yes I can hear you.

MS BURTON

Please will you stand to take the oath.



JAMES NTSOKOLO ZONO		Duly sworn states



MS BURTON

Thank you very much. Mr Zono you live in New Brighton in Noupoort is that
right?

MR ZONO

Yes that’s right.

MS BURTON

You have come to tell us about the death of your brother - Simon Booi
Zono.

MR ZONO

Yes that’s correct.

MS BURTON

Please will you tell us what happened on that day in September 1985.

MR ZONO

Nomalanga came to call my brother together with his friends, they were
sitting in my sisters house and they went to Nomalanga’s home because
Nomalanga told them that Booi was there. And Booi came out of the house
and he fired shots and he shot my brother. And he shot the other one.

	Yes he was a policeman.

MS BURTON

[indistinct] the people who went to the house, go speak to him.

MR ZONO

Nomalanga called them so that they can chase away Booi because the
policeman were not allowed in the location.

MS BURTON

I see thank you - please go on.

MR ZONO

He shot my brother and he covered him with a zinc and he went to the
police station - he came back with a van and he took my brother with the
van to the mortuary.

	And I was working for the Municipality at that time and they told me
there that my brother is dead and he told me that I was needed at home -
I was called at home. And when I arrived at home there were many people
at home and they told me that my brother was shot - he has passed away.
They told me my brother has passed away.

MS BURTON

Thank you Mr Zono - do you know if other people were injured at that time?

MR ZONO

Yes there was one but he is not here in the hall - his surname is Kebane
he is in Johannesburg now. The bullet was taken out in Bloemfontein from
his body. And the police took him to see my brother who has passed away.

MS BURTON

Now there was an inquest into your brother’s death and our investigators
were able to get the inquest record - do you know about that?

MR ZONO

No I don’t know anything about that.



MS BURTON

[indistinct] that we can inform you that an inquest was held and
Constable Booi Jack did make a statement and explained that he was hiding
from a group of young people and then he decided to fire at them and that
is how your brother was killed.

	But the inquest found that nobody was responsible - that’s what they
said at the inquest. And so nobody was ever charged or found responsible
for your brother’s death.

	Is - do you know where constable Booi Jack is now?

MR ZONO

No I don’t know where he is.

MS BURTON

[indistinct] in Noupoort anymore.

MR ZONO

No he left Noupoort a long time ago.

MS BURTON

[indistinct] the sad lost that you and your family experienced Mr Zone. I
am just going to ask my colleagues if they want to ask you any other
questions.

ADV POTGIETER:

Mr Zono did you brother - later brother leave any children behind?

MR ZONO

No he doesn’t have any children he was still young.



ADV POTGIETER:

Would you like to tell us what happened at the funeral were there any
restrictions at the funeral.

MR ZONO

There were many policeman monitoring the funeral.

ADV POTGIETER:

And they - were they placing any restrictions on the funeral telling you
what you should be doing.

MR ZONO

They told us that people were not suppose to be over 50 - people who
attended the funeral.

ADV POTGIETER:

[indistinct] thank you very much.

MS BURTON

Mr Zono was your brother a leader in any community organisation?

MR ZONO

No he was not a leader.

MS BURTON

He just happened to be with that group of people who went to gather
around the house where this constable was hiding.

MR ZONO

Ja he just happened to be there.

MS BURTON

Is there anything else that you would like to say to the Truth Commission.

MR ZONO

No there is nothing else.

MS BURTON

Let me just thank you very much for coming and we once again offer our
sympathy to you and to your family for the loss of your brother. Thank
you very much.



	

