CASE NO:				CT/01404


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

UPINGTON HEARING - DAY 2 - 3 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/01404 /UPI

VICTIM:				JIM BONAKELE YANTA

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:		SEVERELY ASSAULTED BY NP 							SUPPORTERS

TESTIMONY FROM:		JIM BONAKELE YANTA



MR POTGIETER: Good morning Mr Yanta. Are you well?

MR YANTA: Yes I am.

MR POTGIETER: That is good to hear. You are also from Prieska. You are
very welcome here. Before you testify you will have to take the oath so
would you please stand to do that.

JIM BONAKELE YANTA		Duly sworn states

MR POTGIETER: Thank you, you may sit. Mr Yanta you are going to tell us
about something which happened on the 7th September 1993, that is quite
recent. You were assaulted, you were seriously assaulted. Would you like
to tell us what happened on that day. I understand that it took place at
about half past six in the late afternoon. What exactly happened? --- We
were coming home from work, my friend and I, Jafta van Staden and we were
working in the Coloured township and we were doing sewerage works there
and when we knocked off at 5 o'clock in the afternoon, we were on our way
home. We lived in Ethembeni in the location and that was in the Red
Block. On our way home in 20th Avenue a group of young boys approached
us. They were the National Party youth supporters and they stopped us and
they grabbed my friend first and they stoned my friend as well. My friend
started running away and they said that they were National Party
supporters and they didn't want ANC supporters in the location. They
threw stones at me as well and I also tried to free myself and run away.
I ran all the way to our location and I ran into a house, Nomsizi's
house. The lady of the house asked what's happening and I told her that
we were confronted by these young men in the street and they threw stones
at us. The woman then said I must go home. I then went to the police
station in Ethembeni and I laid a charge there. When I came out of the
police station, well I don't know where the other youths of Ethembeni had
heard that we had been assaulted. On my way home in Korda Street I saw
the youth league, members of the youth league there and they said that
there was one National Party supporter in Nana Nell's house and they
wanted to hurt him because they had hurt us. Nana Nell said that the
person hiding inside the house hadn't done anything and that the children
should just leave him alone but the children didn't want to leave him
alone. They kept him in the house. Then the police arrived. It was Reid
and he then took this National Party supporter and took him to Bontheuwel
in the van because the children wanted to hurt him because we had been
hurt. I then went home and the next day I went to the doctor and that
evening the National Party youth called a meeting. They wanted to have a
meeting with us and with the police but they never arrived at the
meeting. On the Friday the police came to my house because I had lodged a
complaint and they said that I should go to Court, that the case was
ready to commence and when we went to the Magistrate's Court, we found
these National Party supporters there as well. I only knew two of these
people. The others, well I knew them from sight hut I didn't know their
names. I saw them going in and out of the prosecutor's office. When we
arrived there the prosecutor called us into his office but they called us
into the office one by one. When I got into his office he asked me what
had happened and I told him. The prosecutor told me that when we appear
in court we should just say that we don't know these other people, we
only know these two people - Glen and Johannes Botha. We should say that
we only knew these two people. So I said yes they are also outside here
but I didn't know their names, just knew their faces. The prosecutor said
well we should just deny knowledge of any of the others and we did what
he told us to do and the case started and we told our story but there
were some of the others outside and they came to Jafta and myself and
told us that we should just drop this case and go home. We shouldn't
continue with this case because we were just all human beings, but we
thought we couldn't just drop the case because they never came to the
meeting which they had called. We told our story in Court and then we
went home but nothing much came of the case but the National Party never
stopped. They always fought with our supporters and our people when they
put up placards and posters and there was a lot of problems during the
election period. There were fights between the National Party people and
our people and some of the ANC members who lived in the location had to
actually move out of the location, out of the Red Block and they had to
come to live in Ethembeni because they were constantly being threatened.
It was PW Simon and Atter, PW Simon and Atter, they were responsible for
this. They encouraged the National Party people to hurt the ANC
supporters but the police would often arrive and then they would have
meetings with our people and we told the police to go and talk to this PW
Simon - to go and tell them that they must leave this and they must drop
what they're doing. The police always said they would but they never
reported back to us what they had done and what the National Party people
had said. When we fought back against the National Party people then the
police would arrive and they would shoot rubber bullets at us. They would
always stop us and only us. Meanwhile it wouldn't be the ANC youth league
who would be the cause of the problem but it would be the National Party
supporters but we would be the people to get shot. So the fighting never
stopped. The police would bring National Party people into the location,
into our location, just to come and hurt our people and when we defended
ourselves then we got hurt and we were regarded as the cause of the
problems and that is all I have to say.

	Thank you Mr Yanta. What is significant in your testimony is the fact
that you are referring to quite recent incidents in 1993 and I would like
to ask you a couple of things just to get clarity in my own mind. Were
you a member or supporter of the ANC youth league? --- Yes I was a member
of the ANC youth league and I was a member of the management committee of
the ANC youth league.

	What was your position there? --- I was the organiser.

	Was that in Prieska? --- Yes.

	Now at that stage you were employed, you were working in Bontheuwel? ---
Yes, Bontheuwel and Rooi Blok.

	Is Rooi Blok a section of Bontheuwel? --- Yes it is the Coloured area.

	Did you work for the municipality? --- No we were working on a contract
to lay pipes.

	What were they busy doing actually? It was the infrastructure sewerage
pipes. --- Sewerage pipes yes.

	So you were busy working to try and improve the infrastructure in that
area of Bontheuwel and you were then assaulted and attacked in
Bontheuwel? --- Yes in Rooi Blok, in the Coloured area.

	And you were assaulted by members of the National Party? --- Was members
of the National Party youth. They lived in that Bontheuwel location.

	And this is the Bontheuwel where you were working to improve the
infrastructure. Now the youth who attacked you, were they Coloured
people? --- Yes they were Coloured people.

	Did they know you? --- Yes they did.

	So they knew you were a member of the ANC? --- Yes they did because they
would always notice us putting up posters and so forth for the election,
so they knew.

	Did they say anything before they attacked you? --- They just stopped us
in the street and we asked them what they were looking for and they
didn't give us any answer. They just said they didn't want any ANC
supporters in their location and we said we don't know anything, we're
just coming home from work, we don't know what's happening in the
location but they just decided they were going to hurt us.

	You sustained certain injuries, you went to the doctor, were you treated
for your injuries? --- Yes and up to today I still have to get medical
treatment because I have problems with my legs.

	So your leg was injured. Did you have any other injuries? --- My arms as
well, my arms were swollen.

	How many people were in the group that attacked you? --- There were
about 20 people, quite a few people.

	At the stage that you were attacked, was there already this conflict
between the ANC and the NP in Prieska? --- Well I don't know because I
worked so if there had been conflict in the location I wouldn't have been
aware of it. All I know is that on that particular day when they
assaulted us they just said they didn't want any ANC supporters there.
Then I realised there was conflict.

	You said that after you were attacked a group of ANC youth supporters
wanted to go and attack and hurt a National Party supporter hiding in a
house there. --- Yes it was on the same day. They hurt many of our
people. Some of our people landed up in Kimberley hospital and other
places.

	So what actually happened is that after you were attacked, the ANC youth
were angry and they wanted to retaliate against the National Party
supporters. --- Yes.

	Was there a lot of fighting after this? --- Yes there was constant
fighting.

	Up until the time the election. --- Yes the fighting continued.

	When did matters improve? --- It only improved after the elections, then
things quietened down a bit.

	And how are things now? --- Well things are not too bad, things are okay.

	Who won the election? --- National Party won the election there because
they were in the majority. Even Wessels when the National Party wanted to
fight us he said to us that we should just leave it because these people
were a majority in Ethembeni and if they wanted to, they could really
hurt us. The ANC youth maintained that they weren't just fighting with
anybody in Rooi Blok, they were just targeting those people who were
hurting other people.

	But you are saying that the fighting is a thing of the past now? --- Yes.

	You refer to two people - PV Simon and Arthur, who are they? --- PW
Simon, he was the leader of the National Party and he is Parliament.

	Was he in Parliament, was he a minister? --- Yes.

	Minister of Education? --- Yes.

	And the other person, Arthur, what is his surname? --- Arthur Robson. He
was also a leader in Prieska, a leader of the National Party.

	What role did they play? --- As I understood it and what we learned from
our parents was that there was a lot of bribery going on.

	Who was bribed? --- The National Party youth people.

	And you said that the police were involved in this conflict as well and
as you explained it, the police brought in National Party supporters into
Ethembeni. --- Yes the Ethembeni youth had to stay awake all night.
Children couldn't go to school because they had to stay awake all night
because the people would just come into Ethembeni and start hurting
people and the police brought these people in.

	So where do you think the police stood in this conflict? --- I think the
police were on the side of the National Party because they were actually
bringing the people into the location during the night.

	Now the case which you made, you said that the prosecutor told you not
to identify and name the other people involved in the attack. --- Yes.

	Why do you think he did that? --- Now I wouldn't know. When we arrived
at the prosecutor's office we saw that he was also talking to the
National Party people in his office and then he called us and then he
told us what to say. He told us not, or to say that we didn't know those
people but I don't know why.

	In other words the prosecutor told you not to implicate those other
people in the case as well. You should only identify and name Johannes
Botha and Glen Jansen, is that right? --- Yes.

	What was the outcome of that case? --- Nothing came of it. On that very
same day they were back in the location.

	So nothing happened as a result of this case. Did you ever testify in
court? --- Yes I testified and when I had given my evidence the
prosecutor said we should go home.

	So you don't know whether the people were convicted or punished or
whether they were acquitted. You just saw them in the location again. ---
Yes.

	Thank you Mr Yanta. I am going to hand over to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: As I told the previous witnesses we thank you for your
contribution, for the contribution which you and other young people like
yourself made. It's contributions like these which helped us to establish
a new dispensation in the country and perhaps you people in Prieska are
now living a little bit more comfortably. There is not so much conflict
anymore but one is concerned about the fact that the prosecutor seemed to
try to influence the outcome of the case and took sides in the case.
Thank you very much and I hope other young people will learn from your
example that we must all stand together and to co-operate to make this
country a better place. Thank you very much. --- Thank you.





