TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 2 - 8 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:			CT/1503/KAR

VICTIM:			ARON MAGAM

VIOLATION:		SUFFOCATION, SHOT AND

KILLED BY POLICE

TESTIMONY BY:	NOMPURURU MAGA



MS BURTON

Perhaps we should stand as I read the names of those who shall testify
today.

They are:

Nompururu Evelyn Magam

Manwabisi Maseti

Mkohnto Mfazwe

Noti Mjada

Gladys Ntsizakalo

Nstokolo James Zono

Floit Joka

William Nkumbi

Elliot Siyoko

Ncamisili Sonamzi

Koos Simakadane

Elsie Jantjie and Nelson Jantjie

and Mr Tshemese

Let’s keep a moment silence. Thank you.

We now call our first witness to the stage, Nompururu Evelyn Magam.

Good morning again Ms Magam. Can you hear me well.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Yes I can hear you.

MS BURTON

Sit a little bit nearer to the microphone so that other people can hear
you. Thank you. Before we begin, may I ask you to stand to take the oath.



NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM		Duly sworn states



MS BURTON

Thank you very much. Please sit down. Ms Joyce Seroke is going to
facilitate your testimony this morning. Thank you.

MS SEROKE

I would like to greet you Nompururu this morning, We thank you for coming
here today to give us evidence about what happened to your brother on the
25th or 26th of July in 1985. We would like to tell us what happened on
that day when your brother was shot.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Can I speak?

MS SEROKE

Yes you can speak now.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

It was in 1985. People were toi-toiing in the township throughout the
streets. My brother was not there at that time. He was on duty. I was
sitting in front of the house at the time. The toi-toi went to facing the
Rand office. I think it was come at that time when he came from work and
I was talking to him at that time - asking him whether he wanted tea.

While we were still talking - they are two gates at home - there’s two
gates at home - there’s one for my home and one for the neighbour. The
police came - I couldn’t count them, because there were a lot. They said
to him he must go out - out of the house to collect dustbins that were
used as barracks and he refused.

I told the police that they must leave him alone because he is not
feeling well. The police ignored me. One of the policeman then dragged
him out but he resisted and he managed to get inside the shack and close
the door. The police then used force - they kicked the door and I cried
to the police - begging them to leave my brother alone. Others were
around the windows, trying to break the windows. One of the policeman
tried to kick the door. And I tried to talk to them to leave my brother
alone.

The policemen were around the windows - they were putting in tear gas
threw the windows. One of the them tried to kick the door hard and they -
he managed to kick the door. I was still crying - begging them to leave
my brother alone. My brother was dizzy at the time with the tear gas and
he got out of the shack.

He managed to run to the neighbours house. He went to our neighbours
house and the police followed him. I also followed them. I was crying and
I saw him slipping in the bedroom in our neighbours house. The police
came through the window and I could see my brother bleeding. He couldn’t
even breath. He was quiet. They dragged him to the van outside.

One of the policeman tramped on his head. Two of the policemen threw him
into the van. That’s all I saw that day.

MS SEROKE

You said that Aron was working in the butchery. What time did he go back
at home.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

He came back at twelve p.m. or sometimes he used to come back at one.

MS SEROKE

When the beer hall was burnt. What was the time then.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

It was about nine o’clock and he was on duty at the time.



MS SEROKE

Was he a member of the youth congress in the township or the village or
was he just an ordinary person.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

He had ANC membership card, but I am not sure whether he was a member.
But he a membership card.

MS SEROKE

What did the police say to him when they went to fetch him.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Everybody in the township was being taken by the police - but my brother
didn’t know what was happening at that time.

MS SEROKE

Who was in the house with you when this thing was happening.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

It was me and my father.

MS SEROKE

When your brother could out of the bedroom - what was he holding in the
hand.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

He was holding nothing.

MS SEROKE

Did you see the person who shot your brother.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

No, I did not, because they were many policemen.

MS SEROKE

Did you hear a gunshot.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

No, I didn’t hear any gunshot, because I was crying at that time.

MS SEROKE

Did you go to a court case after your brother’s death. Did you know who
shot your brother.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Yes, my late brother was called to the court.

MS SEROKE

Did he go there.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Yes, he did.

MS SEROKE

What was the explanation of your brother’s death.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

I didn’t ask my brother, because I was not there at the time.

MS SEROKE

I will read to you the inquest on your brother’s case. They said that
your brother Aron was shot and the bullet went though the heart and the
lungs and he was shot by Constable Love - one of the police who were
there.

But when their defending themselves, they said that Aron - Aron had a
baton and an axe in his hands and he attacked one of the Constables -
Constable Love and the Constable fell down. And when this Constable fell
down - was lying down, Aron wanted to axe him and that was when he was
shot. The police said that they were defending themselves.

That is not true, because he was dizzy at that time he went out of the
shack. They were no batons or weapons in the shack. It was only a bed and
a table in the shack - nothing else. There were no axes because there
were no weapons at all. We didn’t want any weapons, because he was
someone who was sick and we were afraid that he would injure himself.

MS SEROKE

You say that he was dizzy with the tear gas.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Yes, he was dizzy with tear gas. One can ask the question that a person
who was dizzy and who cannot see clearly, where he would get the strength
to do this. He was so weak - he couldn’t even defend himself. There were
many policemen around and he couldn’t do anything to defend himself. One
of the policemen said they must shoot him to death.

MS SEROKE

I would now give this opportunity to the Chairperson.

ADV POTGIETER

Thank you Chairperson. Is it Ms Magam or Magama.



NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Yes.

ADV POTGIETER

The police that were involved in this incident. Did you know whether they
were from Noupoort or were they from somewhere else.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

There were no police from Noupoort in the police were there.

ADV POTGIETER

[Indistinct]. What was his health like. Was he suffering from any
ailments.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

Yes, he was - the health was not good. He was an ill person.

ADV POTGIETER

What was wrong with him.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

He was suffering from epileptic.

ADV POTGIETER

And was there anything wrong with his lungs. Did he ever have an ailment
of his lungs - asthma or something like that.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

No, I don’t think so - but what I know he was suffering from epileptic
fits and he would suffer from that for three days or so.





ADV POTGIETER

Just one other bit of information that was given to us by our
investigators when they looked at the case. At the inquest that was held
subsequently into your late brother’s death the police submitted some
plan - a sketch plan of the scene of the incident.

And also there was evidence of the injuries that your late brother
sustained and our investigators make the point that according to the
explanation that the police gave - your late brother’s - the right side
of your late brother’s body would have been turned towards the policeman
who shot him, according to the way the police explained what happened,
but the actual wounds in the body was on the left hand side.

So that just on that information the incident could not have happened as
the police tried to explain to the court. So that it appears as if there
were quite a bit of discrepancy in the explanation that the police tried
to give for the death of your brother. But in any event you have given us
your version and your version clearly contradicts even this version that
the police gave, although the version of he police itself is full of
difficulties and we have noted what you have said about that.

I just wanted to give you that explanation so that you have as much
information as possible. Thank you.



MS BURTON

Ms Magam thank you for coming to tell us about this today. It is a very
hard thing for you and your family to have lost your brother in that way
and we express our sympathy with you and your family. We hope that what
you have heard about the evidence that our investigators have followed up
makes you feel that it was worthwhile to come and to know that there are
other people who give credence and weight to the testimony that you have
given today and that there is greater public understanding of the way
which your brother died.

And we know it takes courage and it puts you through additional pain to
come and talk to us today, but we value very much that you came to tell
us and we thank you very much indeed. Is there anything else that you
want to say to us or ask of us.

NOMPURURU EVELYN MAGAM

What I would like to say is that my brother was a breadwinner at home. He
was the one supporting us.

MS BURTON

[Indistinct] understand that and your family is probably suffering
hardship now. Thank you very much.



