TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - 7 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/01533/KAR

VICTIM:				TSHEDISO PHAKALITHA

VIOLATION:			DISAPPEARED AFTER ARRESTED

					BY POLICE

TESTIMONY BY:		MIRIAM PHAKALITHA



MS BURTON

[Indistinct] Phakalitha. Can you hear me all right on the ear phones.

MIRIAM PHAKALITHA

Yes.

MS BURTON

And you have a member of your family

MIRIAM PHAKALITHA

Yes.

MS BURTON

Who is he?



MIRIAM PHAKALITHA

It is my brother.

MS BURTON

Welcome sir, thank you.



MIRIAM PHAKALITHA			Duly sworn states



MS BURTON

Thank you ver much. You have come today to tell us about the
disappearance of your father a long time ago - in 1968 was it?

MS PHAKALITHA

It is said it is 1968 - I did not know.

MS BURTON

Please tell us what you know of what happened.

MS PHAKALITHA

Okay, as it is said in 1968 my mother is a twin and my aunt was looking
after us. My father was working in Brooksun. He then was transferred to
Victoria West - we were very young then. One day apparently policemen
went to the house, asking for my father. She - my mother then said he’s
in Victoria West. The police said - asked them if they are telling the
truth. My mother is very cheeky - she insisted that she works in Victoria
West. From time and time again, they would come.

She then phone the house where my father was staying. She told my father
that there are police kept on coming. My father is originally from
Lesotho. When my mother phoned, somebody said he was jailed. She asked
the boers - the boers were cheeky - my mother is also cheeky. The boers
said my father had left because he is too political.

My mother never was clear whether my father had gone home to Lesotho, did
they take him to the border gates, what exactly happened.

MS BURTON

You were also told at the time that he was somehow connected with the
people who were accused in Victoria West of trying to poison the water
supply.

MS PHAKALITHA

That is what they say.

MS BURTON

[Indistinct] to us when we were in Beaufort West from that group of
people who were arrested at the time.

MS PHAKALITHA

Wilson is one of them. He was my father’s friend. My father sister was
also there, but she’s also not clear. All she knows is that my father was
arrested.



MS BURTON

And none of your family ever saw him again.

MS PHAKALITHA

To this day - no.

MS BURTON

You believe of coming to talk here today there may be some way of finding
out what happened to him.

MS PHAKALITHA

I’d be glad - I want to see my father. I want to know - is he really at
home - what happened. Did they take him to the border, because he’s from
Lesotho, what happened.

MS BURTON

We know that it is very, very difficult when one does not know what
became of a family member. There isn’t very much more that we can ask you
to tell us, because it was a long time ago, but we will see what can be
done to try and find out if there is any trace of him, by making some
further inquiries. I am just going to ask my colleagues if they want to
ask you any questions.

MS SEROKE

When you ask your mother, does she not know people from Lesotho who would
know your father’s address. Did you try to find out in Lesotho what
happened to your father. Did you go to his home and ask his family.



MS PHAKALITHA

There are people - it is my grandfather - who is there, but the last time
my grandfather had seen my father - it’s when he was still this side.

MS SEROKE

Did your father meet your mother in the Cape. Had she never gone to
Lesotho.

MS PHAKALITHA

They met here - my mother had never - did go to Lesotho.

ADV POTGIETER

Ms Phakalitha - Ms Phakalitha the police were apparently alleging that
your father is too politically involved. What did they say, was he
involved in the PAC. Because there was - we’ve heard evidence in other
hearings as the Chairperson has indicated about other persons - who were
also arrested in connection with this incident who alleged to have linked
to the PAC or [indistinct] the Military wing of the PAC at that stage.

Were there any talks about that, your father been involved in that
political grouping?

MS PHAKALITHA

According to Wilson they were a member of the PAC. Apparently my father
was very militant, very cheeky.

ADV POTGIETER

[Indistinct] your mother, Ms Phakalitha [indistinct]

MS PHAKALITHA

We were four children.

ADV POTGIETER

[Indistinct] and [indistinct] over the years.

MS PHAKALITHA

Both my mother and my father’s sister brought us up.

ADV POTGIETER

Your father’s sister, is she also here or is she in Lesotho.

MS PHAKALITHA

She’s here

ADV POTGIETER

[Indistinct] I just want to make sure [indistinct] the translation
[indistinct] your mother and your father’ sister.

MS PHAKALITHA

My mother is a twin. It is my mother and her twin sister that brought us
up.

ADV POTGIETER

Thank you very much.

MS BURTON

Thank you Ms Phakalitha for coming today. As I say our - we have a
special Investigation Unit which can be asked to look and see if there’s
any trace of your father outside our country’s borders, but perhaps we
also can use this opportunity where you have spoken in front of a big
audience and have been heard through the radio and so on, that we can
appeal that if there is anybody who can give any more information, which
would allow your family to have peace in knowing what happened to your
father, we would encourage them to make contact and to let you know, so
that you can all be helped in this way.

We thank you very-very much for coming. We understand that it is very
distressing and we thank you.



