CASE NO:				CT/04431	


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

UPINGTON HEARING - DAY 2 - 3 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:				CT/04431/UPI	

VICTIM:				PIET SCHEFFERS

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:	POISONED BY EMPLOYER

TESTIMONY FROM: 		MARIA KATRINA PAPIER [daughter]

					ELISABETH PAPIER [wife]



MR POTGIETER: Is it Maria who is sitting in front of the microphone? Good
afternoon Maria, welcome here, and is it Ms Papier sitting next to you?
Good afternoon to you as well and welcome to you here. Before you give
your evidence you have to take the oath. I will first ask Maria who is
sitting in front of the microphone. Will you please stand Maria to take
the oath.

MARIA KATRINA PAPIER		Duly sworn states

MR POTGIETER: Please sit down. Ms Papier you will also have to take the
oath. Please stand.

ELISABETH PAPIER			Duly sworn states

MR POTGIETER: Please sit down. Ms Burton will be assisting both of you to
lead your evidence. I hand over to her. Thank you.

MS BURTON: Morning Ms Papier. Are you feeling a little bit nervous?

MS PAPIER: No I am fine.

MS BURTON: Good, good. I hope you feel comfortable.

MS PAPIER: No I am fine.

MS BURTON: You and your mother have come to tell us today about the death
of your father, Mr Scheffers who went to work apparently completely
healthy in February 1993, just three years ago, a bit more than three
years ago. Please tell us what happened. 	

MS PAPIER: The Thursday morning...

MS BURTON: It’s all right, you can just take your time.

MS PAPIER: The Thursday morning when my father left for work he was in
good health and the Thursday evening when the Boer brought him back home,
my father was standing on the back of the bakkie and he wasn't able to
speak. I asked him what was wrong. and the white person never answered me.

	They took him from the bakkie and put him down on the stoep. He was
lying on the stoep. I asked for the man, Gert Cloete who was with them,
what was wrong with my father but they never answered me. This white man
went back to his own house and I tried to sustain my father but I
couldn't help him at all. This white man came back and said, is this
bastard still alive, and I said you can't talk like this, you brought him
here like this but he didn't give me an answer and drove off again. He
went back to his house and later on he came back again - has this bastard
died already - and I said you can't talk like this, this is my father. He
drove off again. I tried to help my father but it was to no avail.

	My mother came home then and she said she must try and get a vehicle to
get my father to the doctor. She went off and tried to get a motor
vehicle to take my father to the doctor. We took my father to the
hospital by car. We only went to the hospital on Friday and they put a
drip in his arm. My mother talked to my father but he couldn't utter one
single word. We returned home again. On Saturday morning we went to the
hospital again and there we heard that he had died.

MS BURTON: Thank you Ms Papier. Your father worked for the farmer, Mr
Hanekom, is that right?

MS PAPIER: Yes.

MS BURTON: That is the person who kept and brought him home and then who
kept coming back to ask if he was still alive?

MS PAPIER: Yes.

MS BURTON:	And what did the hospital or the doctors tell you was wrong
with your father, what was the cause of his death?

MS PAPIER: I don't know. They never said anything, I can't say what was
the cause of his death.

MS BURTON: Do you have any suspicions about what might have happened?

MS PAPIER: As I understand, this white man took my father, took him home
and he gave him wine to drink. I don't know what kind of wine was that.
When he brought my father back his mouth was blue, his eyes were swollen
and his mouth was frothing.

MS BURTON: How was it that you heard that he had been given this wine to
drink?

MS PAPIER: I could smell. I could smell that he had taken strong liquor.
I don't know what they've put in this wine, I can't say but I could smell
that he had drink, liquor.

MS BURTON: And you mentioned that there was somebody else who came with
Mr Hanekom to bring your father home?

MS PAPIER: Yes this man brought him home from work. This man also went to
the farmer's house and together they brought him back home and put him
down on the stoep. This white man left and the other man returned home as
well.

MS BURTON: That’s Mr Cloete this other man is it?

MS PAPIER: Yes he was Mr Cloete.

MS BURTON: Was he also a worker on the farm?

MS PAPIER: Yes he was.

MS BURTON:	Ms Papier you say that you had the sense that there was the
smell of some strong alcohol. The investigators were able to look for the
post-mortem report which says that your father died of alcohol poisoning
but the blood sample that was taken from him was sent to be tested and
there was no alcohol found in the blood, so there seems to be some
discrepancy still there and maybe that is something that we still need to
look into more deeply. 	In your statement to us you, what you said was
that you want to know why and how your father died. We will continue to
try and find if there is anything more that can be explored through the
medical records. Is there anything else that you want to tell us now?

MS PAPIER: I just want to know the truth why my father died, that is all.

MS BURTON: We can certainly understand that, that wish.

	Does your mother want to speak as well?

MS PAPIER: Do you wish to speak Mother? She says no she doesn't feel like
it.

MS BURTON: 	We can understand that it is very distressing for her. Can I
just ask you then - does your mother get a pension?

MS PAPIER: Nee ons het geen inkomste.

MS BURTON:	And your father was the breadwinner, so how do you manage?

MS PAPIER: We live with our mother's brother. He doesn't work at the
moment. He sometimes does temporary work. I also do not have a job.

MS BURTON: Thank you very much Chairperson I have no further questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Denzil Potgieter?

MR POTGIETER: Thank your Chairperson. Maria, in your written statement
that we have in our files, it says that your father and Mr Hanekom used
to argue with one another because your father was a member of the ANC, is
that correct?

MS PAPIER: Yes.

MR POTGIETER: So they didn't have a very good relationship?

MS PAPIER: No.

MR POTGIETER: And you also say that this Mr Hanekom never gave an
explanation of what had gone wrong with your father. He left for work a
healthy person and that afternoon he brought him back in that condition
you described. I suppose this Mr Hanekom is the owner of some or other
farm in the vicinity of Keimoes and is he still there?

MS PAPIER: Yes he is still there.

MR POTGIETER: One should accept that he will be able to give one or other
kind of explanation what went wrong with your father. Have you ever gone
to court in connection with your father's death or in connection with
this incident?

MS PAPIER: No.

MR POTGIETER: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Mev Papier and Maria I find it very difficult to find words
to express our feelings to soften your pain. We hope that we can
investigate this matter further to try and find out what exactly happened
to your father. Perhaps this will soften the pain in your hearts and
souls and this will be a kind of ointment which will heal the wounds that
you have in your hearts.

	One cannot believe that things like this could have happened in our
country, that people's lives were so cheap. One just could take a gun and
shoot another person like an animal or in this case, one doesn't know
whether it was poison or what had happened. But we just want to say,
because we also feel hurt and we also feel with you and we pray that God
will help all of us that incidents like this never ever happen again in
our country.

	Thank you very much.







