CASE NO:					CT/04422


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

UPINGTON HEARING - DAY 2 - 3 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:					CT/04422 /UPI

VICTIM:					NKOSANA KINGSLEY MSEA

NATURE OF VIOLENCE:			ASSAULT BY POLICE

TESTIMONY FROM:			NKOSANA KINGSLEY MSEA



MR POTGIETER: Good morning. How are you?

MR MSEA: I am fine.

NKOSANA KINGSLEY MSEA		Duly sworn states

MR POTGIETER: Thank you, you can be seated. Mary Burton will lead you to
give your evidence. I hand over to her.

MS BURTON: Good morning. --- Yes.

	And you're going to tell us about things that happened to you in March
of 1986 and particularly on an occasion where there was a march of the
students. Were you a student yourself at the time? --- The year you
mentioned was wrong, it was 1986. I wasn't a student. In March 1986 the
schools closed for the holidays. I was in the vicinity in the township
and the children came from school singing, singing up and down the
street. When they came to the municipality office and then they, the
mayor fired at them. He didn't warn him, he shot at one specific person.
He shot one person in the leg and afterwards we became violent. We took
the law into our own hands and we started throwing stones. Apartheid was
very rigid at that time. It was during the times of La Grange and PW
Botha. They were very bad people. We went on and were throwing stones.
Very early the next morning certain policemen came there from Prieska, I
do not know their names. They took me to the police station. At the
police station I was in my short trousers and a T-shirt and was very calm
because I didn't do anything but I must admit I did do something wrong.
They put me into a cell and then Visagie came there, Mosotho and Muller
came to my cell. They were from the security police and they were La
Grange's security police. They took me from the cell and interrogated me.
I did not answer them at all. These people assaulted me. They kicked me
and they asked me who are the leaders and I said I do not know. They
assaulted me again and if I think back of all this, it was, my mother was
so shocked because of all these things that still today she is deceased.
It was the State of Emergency during that time and one day a person came
there, he was the Brigadier and we lodged complaints but he never paid
any attention to them. They, I never received medical attention and I
only believed in the Lord. Today I can still feel all the pain and
through all this pain and suffering I just trusted the Lord. Still today
I suffer from the pain. Even today I have this terrible headaches. They
knocked all the brains out of my head. Today I want to know from the
Truth Commission today, these people who assaulted me, I never saw them
afterwards. They were not policemen from Prieska, they were policemen
from De Aar. They came to our town to assault us. I have nothing further
to add. Thank you.

	 ... Msea you say that they questioned you about who the leaders were.
Did you really not know who the leaders were? --- Yes, I did know who the
leaders were but if you are involved in the struggle you should always
say no I do not know who they are. You should struggle and shouldn't
become part of the system. Although I did know who they were, I did not
tell them. Today I am glad those people are in leadership positions, like
the person who was here before, the truth must come out and there are a
lot of friends we had, they are still working in Upington, they were
leaders then and at that time I did not admit that they were leaders.

	Do you feel, you have talked about those leaders now being in other
positions, that things have changed, that some of the struggle and some
of the suffering that you went through was worthwhile for those changes?
--- Yes I can say so. I fought for my country and everything is fine now.
At that time apartheid was very, very strict.

	 ... your occupation now? --- I am unemployed.

	 ... problems we still have to face within our country, isn't it? ---
Yes it is.

	Physically do you have any long-term effects from the assaults and
torture of that time? --- Yes some evenings when I sleep I suffer from
nightmares and I still see these people who assaulted me and then I
become very violent but then the Lord calms me down.

	 ... very much Mr Msea. I don't know if you have anything else you would
like to say before I ask my colleagues if they have any other questions?
--- There is nothing more I wish to add.

CHAIRPERSON: Dankie. Denzil?

MR POTGIETER: Thank you Chairperson. Mr Msea you say that the police in
Prieska were very violent against you. --- They locked me up, they didn't
treat me so badly, they just locked me up.

	You said you were involved in the struggle and you feel that it was all
worth the while. How do you feel about the police in Prieska today? Are
there any bad feelings, can you co-operate with them? --- Yes I
co-operate with them at the moment.

	And the other people in Prieska as far as you know? --- No we are happy
and peaceful there and everything is much improved regarding all the
various relationships.

	Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. I have observed that although you had a
complaint against the police, what is remarkable is that now, as it
appears from an answer on a question from Advocate Potgieter, is to say
that this police is not treating me badly. This is something which
impresses me. It proves that here we are concerned with the truth and we
thank you for that contribution. Thank you for all the pain that you have
suffered but that you do not seek for revenge. That there is no revenge
in your heart and that now you can still testify that you are all one
happy family in your town. That you can work and live together in peace.
We are sorry to hear that you are unemployed at the moment. There are so
many of our people who suffer from, under this unemployment and we really
hope that with our new system, things can develop in such a way that all
our people can obtain jobs. It is not going to help at all if we have our
freedom, if we are free from apartheid and all its evils but now there is
no liberation in the economy. We thank you and all the other people who
co-operated with you, everybody who made this contribution to our
liberation. Thank you very much.



