TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 1 - 10 JUNE 1996



CASE NO:			CT/04106

VICTIM:			NZIMENI PATRICK BOSMAN

VIOLATION:		TORTURE BY POLICE AND

				UNLAWFULLY ARRESTED

TESTIMONY BY:		NZIMENI PATRICK BOSMAN



NZIMENI PATRICK BOSMAN		Duly sworn states



DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much, will you please be seated. Mr Bosman you are a young
man and you have suffered a great deal. We are very grateful that you
have come, we hope you will feel comfortable and relaxed as you tell your
story. And to assist you to do that, my colleague Glenda Wildschut will
now take over from me, thank you.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Thank you very much Mr Chairman, I would like to point out to you that Mr
Patrick Bosman was a young man involved in merely handing out pamphlets
during a consumer boycott but since that day - that faithful day when all
he was doing, was handing out pamphlets at a consumer boycott Mr Bosman’s
life has changed dramatically.

	Good morning Mr Bosman, are you comfortable there. I wonder if you
couldn’t just move closer to the microphone. Okay, all right Mr Bosman
could you tell us a little bit about yourself. Tell us who you are, where
you come from - perhaps how old you are and what you are doing presently
- what you are doing now.

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION



MS WILDSCHUT:

Patrick - Patrick just take your time and tell your story slowly, okay.

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

Patrick you are talking about at the time when you were in the police
station and you were beaten and tortured in the police station. Your
shoulder was broken, is that right?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

Did you ever receive any medical treatment for your broken shoulder at
that time when you were beaten?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

Are you all right to continue now, Patrick?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

Patrick have you ever worked since that incident?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

Can I ask you, you mentioned earlier on that apart from your body being
very badly injured you also feeling that emotionally you’re not well. Can
you tell us a little bit about that?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

This passing out that happens to you, does it happen [indistinct]



MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

So talking now is quite difficult for you, Patrick?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

MS WILDSCHUT:

Patrick thank you very much for telling us about your story. There might
be other people on the panel who would like to ask you some questions,
but we are very aware that it’s - it’s very difficult and it’s painful
and we want to make it as easy as possible for you.

CHAIRPERSON:

[indistinct] Dr Boraine?

DR BORAINE:

I’ll be very brief, Patrick are you receiving any medical treatment now?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

DR BORAINE:

So at the moment you are not receiving any treatment at all?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

DR BORAINE:

Thank you, when you left the hospital after you were assaulted and you
spent about 2 - 3 days in the hospital, you laid a charge of assault at
the Kuruman Police Station. What has happened about that?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

DR BORAINE:

Can you remember ever been called to attend an identity parade so that
you could point out who hurt you so badly?



MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

DR BORAINE:

The last question then you don’t have to tell me that now but unless you
want to but can you remember and perhaps we could get it from afterwards
or now the names of the people who hurt you and assaulted you when you
were in police custody?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

DR BORAINE:

Are any of these still in the Police Force - are any of the people who
hurt you still working for the police?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

DR BORAINE:

Thank you very much Patrick.

MS WILDSCHUT:

Patrick, now that you’ve come to tell your story to the Commission, we
know that you've suffered a lot but what is it that you would expect from
the Commission. What is it that we can do for you?

MR BOSMAN:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION

CHAIRPERSON:

XHOSA - NO TRANSLATION



[THIS FOLLOWS ON TAPE 2]

MR BOSMAN:

[indistinct] the white guys - white policeman who hit me at the police
station. So I don’t know how you could help me, you can offer any help
you can offer to me if you can.





CHAIRPERSON:

Thanks a lot and we are very touched to hear something of this nature and
we know that the freedom we have achieved didn’t come - it came through a
lot of struggles. We therefore ask God to give you strength through the
problems we have and we’ll try as a Commission to help you with your
problems.

MR BOSMAN:

Thank you very much.

















































STATEMENT - NZIMENI PATRICK BOSMAN



I, Nzimeni Patrick Bosman was in town to support the consumer boycott
that was launched on 4th and 5th March in response to the refusal of
permission for a march.

	It was during November 1991. I was standing next to the bus terminus
holding a consumer boycott pamphlet. At that stage there were people
drinking beer and I only informed them about the action. When one of them
saw the police he approached me and argued with me.

	The police intervened and arrested me. They beat me and took me to the
police station. I broke my right shoulder due to the torture. I was later
released. I was again arrested near to Shoprite. The Monday I went to
Court because the police claimed that I stabbed the person who was
arguing with me. This man denied the statement made by the police. The
case was postponed to 27 November 1991. I went to the court hearing.
There I was found not guilty by the Magistrate Poolman of the Kuruman
District Court. Due to the fact that my shoulder was broken I could not
even eat because of the pain. I was kicked and made a punching bag.

	Nothing happened to the police because of the assault on me. Up until
now I have not heard whether the police were sentenced.



















REPORT BY MARK KILLIAN - DATED 4TH JUNE 1996



The complainant in the above-mentioned case will testify that on the 30th
November 1991 he participated in the consumer boycott that was held in
the Kuruman district. Complainant read aloud the pamphlet that was issued
by the ANC for the people not to buy anything in town. Whilst reading the
pamphlet aloud to the people that was standing or listening to the
complainant the complainant was confronted by four unknown black males
and without any reason he was assaulted by these males for orchestrating
or being part of a consumer boycott in the town.

	Whilst the complainant was being assaulted the policeman arrived and
took the complainant as well as the four black males to the Kuruman
police station. When they arrived at the Kuruman police station the
complainant was once again assaulted by the policeman who brought him to
the police station. The complainant was also later assaulted by the four
males in the police station.

	Complainant will further state that he was taken to a room where the
white policeman requested the Coloured constable to take his
fingerprints. While his fingerprints were being taken he was once again
assaulted by the Coloured policeman. Complainant will also testify that
he was hit with the butt of a rifle all over his body, that he was kicked
and hit with a fist.

	Complainant was then detained for three days at the Kuruman police
station and on the Monday appeared before the Magistrate’s Court for a
charge of assault with intend to do grievous bodily harm. After
complainant had been released from the Court, he was admitted to Kuruman
Hospital where he received treatment for approximately three days.

	After complainant had left the hospital he laid a charge of assault at
the Kuruman police station. Kuruman case docket no CR7/12/91 refers.

	According to the complainant nothing ever materialised of the case he
made at the Kuruman police station. Kuruman police station was visited
and the following documentation were retrieved.

1. Case docket CR7/12/91.
2. Sergeant Sarel White made a statement that he held an ID parade but
   the suspect that was charged on this particular case or questioned on
   this particular case was never part of the ID parade and according to
   Sergeant Sarel White the complainant could not point out anybody on
   this ID parade. On the day that the complainant laid the charge at
   Kuruman police station he undersigned the statement he made to the
   police officer but the statement he made on the 14th January 1992
   relating to the ID parade has a thumbprint on and it is countersigned
   by the policeman as that of the complainant. This causes doubt if
   there ever was an ID parade held or if it is the complainant’s
   thumbprint.
3. The case docket as previously mentioned was closed undetected by
   Major Cordier because the complainant, according to the Investigating
   Officer could not be traced.

	The complainant in this matter desires further investigation and would
like the TRC to re-open or to have the case that he made re-opened and
that the perpetrator/perpetrators be charged. The perpetrator in this
case is reservist Constable Strydom of the Kuruman police station and not
Constable Pieterse as alleged by the complainant because Constable
Pieterse only started work at Kuruman from 15th June 1992. The copies of
case no CR7/12/91 as well as copies of the complainant’s arrest as well
as a copy of the SAP 13, as well as a copy of the CR register will be
available in this particular case.

