TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 3 - 26 JUNE 1996



CASE NO:				CT/08100

VICTIM:				PIETERSE AFRIKA

VIOLATION:			SHOT DEAD BY POLICE

TESTIMONY FROM:		LYA MAURISE



DR ORR:

Good morning Mrs Maurise thank you for being present here today. Would
you please rise to take the oath.



LYA MAURISE					(sworn states)



DR ORR:

Mrs Maurise and I spoke earlier and she said to me that she was not
present when her son was shot and asked me to read the report by our
investigating team and she will then tell the remainder of the story. I
will read it in English but maybe Mrs Maurise can use the headphones to
hear it in Afrikaans.

	Our investigators spoke to Archie Alchaster who was with the victim when
he was shot. It was September 1976 and the witness states that he was one
of five people travelling in a car with the victim - that’s Pieter Afrika
on the day of the killing.

The witness was sitting in the back of the vehicle next to the victim as
the car passed the Montagu police station the witness saw a policeman by
the name of Mouton standing in front of the charge office. This policeman
apparently shot at the car with a pistol. They continued on their way
home. When they stopped near one of the passengers houses, they witness
saw blood on the victims right shoulder, they took him to hospital and he
died on the same day. The witness told the investigators that the car
they were driving was covered with anti Government slogans and that they
were under the influence of alcohol, but were not drunk.

The following day the witness and thirteen others were detained by the
police for a period of three weeks at Robertson Prison.

Investigators were informed by the Montagu court that the inquest report
had been destroyed.

You may take the earphones off. Mrs Maurise can you tell us the story how
you heard it from the day the policeman came to your home.

MRS MAURISE:

It was on the Monday morning of the 13th before 8 o’clock when the police
van stopped in front of my house and Mr Mouton sat between 2 other police
officers in front of the van and he then said to me that he understood
that he had shot my son but that he was not aiming for my son, he was
trying to shoot the driver of the vehicle.

DR ORR:

Did he say why he wanted to shoot the driver?

MRS MAURISE:

No he did not say and I didn’t ask him because I had burst into tears. I
never made any enquiries because I didn’t believe that I could make
enquiries, he had to tell me himself. My feeling was that if these
children had done something wrong, they could have taken the children
into custody and locked them up if they had done something wrong and come
and told the parents what had happened.

	I just had to bear this pain all this time. This is a pain that never
leaves you. At the time I had a child in school who had to finish his
schooling and these children no longer had a parent. His money used to
come home on Friday’s but after this it was difficult for me to take care
of this child. It was very difficult in other ways as well. After the
inquest I was never called in, I was never asked anything about the
inquest they just came outside and told me that the inquest was over and
that no one was found guilty for my son’s death.

DR ORR:

Were you at the court for the inquest?

MRS MAURISE:

Yes I was but I was never called in.

DR ORR:

So they simply came and told you after the inquest that no one was found
guilty for you son’s death?

MRS MAURISE:

Yes that is correct.

DR ORR:

Please tell us about your son and his age.

MRS MAURISE:

He was 25 years old, he was not married and he had no children. He lived
in my home and he worked for me.

DR ORR:

Was he politically active?

MRS MAURISE:

No he was not involved in any politics at all.

DR ORR:

What were the consequences on your life after the death of your son, how
did this affect you?

MRS MAURISE:

This affected my health, I am still not healthy today and I’m not able to
go outside in the mornings and the evenings. I am a useless person
because my health has deteriorated. Ever since then I have never been
healthy. My health has been taken away with my son.

DR ORR:

Are you married, is your husband still alive?

MRS MAURISE:

No my son maintained us. I received his income on Fridays and it was only
his income that made a contribution to my household as all my other
children are married.

DR ORR:

How many children do you have altogether ?

MRS MAURISE:

I have seven children. I had seven children including him.

DR ORR:

What do you want the Truth Commission to do for you and your family?

MRS MAURISE:

I would appreciate the Truth Commission to give me a lump sum of money if
it was possible.

DR ORR:

Do you want to say anything else to us?

MRS MAURISE:

No.

DR ORR:

So there is nothing else that you would like to say?

MRS MAURISE:

No nothing else.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Does anybody want to ask any questions? Glenda Wildschut?

GLENDA WILDSCHUT:

Mrs Maurise you mentioned someone by the name of Mouton, do you know this
person, is this person known to you?

MRS MAURISE:

This person was the Commanding Officer at the Montagu police station.

GLENDA WILDSCHUT:

Is it true that this person came back to you?

MRS MAURISE:

Yes on the Monday morning of the 13th and he then said to me that he did
not aim at my child, he wanted to shoot the driver of the vehicle.

GLENDA WILDSCHUT:

The driver of this vehicle Appolis Hanson is since deceased but not due
to this incident.

GLENDA WILDSCHUT:

Thank you very much.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Mary Burton?

MS BURTON:

I don’t really just want - in so much want to ask a question as to say to
Ms Maurise that our investigators have followed up as much as they can to
get information and anything - any documents that we can find, we will
then put them together and let Ms Maurise know any other information that
we can get.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA:

Ms Maurise thank you for coming this morning to the hearings of the Truth
Commission. It’s very difficult to understand how people can be shot at
in the way that your son was shot. And it’s with sadness that we share
your pain and acknowledge the fact that you lost your health with the
death of your son.

	We would like to pledge a commitment to follow up the incidents, the
circumstances that brought your son’s death and we wish that you would
trust in this process and we would do our best, thank you very much.

--------------------------







