	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		25.09.1996	NAME: THABO JOSEPH DIKOKO

CASE NUMBER: 01405 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

PROF MEIRING: Mr Dikoko, would you please come to the forum. Mr Dikoko,
are you comfortable, can you hear me?

MR DIKOKO: Yes, I can hear you.

PROF MEIRING: You came all the way from Bloemhof to be with us. Welcome,
and I hope you find it is a healing experience to sit here in front of us
and tell your story. You brought somebody with you on your right-hand
side. Would you like to introduce him to us?

MR DIKOKO: This is the community secretary at Bophelong Town Council, his
name is Patrick.

PROF MEIRING: Patrick, a word of welcome to you too. Thank you for
honouring us by coming. Mr Dikoko, before I ask Dr Randera to lead you in
your testimony, will you please stand to take the oath.

THABO JOSEPH DIKOKO: (Duly sworn, states).

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. Now Dr Randera will help you with your
testimony.

DR RANDERA: Mr Dikoko, good morning again. Are you comfortable?

MR DIKOKO: I am comfortable, thank you.

DR RANDERA: I thank you for coming all the way from Bophelong this
morning. I know having driven to all these towns that it is not around
the corner. Mr Dikoko, before

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	T J DIKOKO

I ask you to tell us what happened to you in 1985, will you please tell
us something about yourself; are you married, do you have any children,
what is your work at the moment, what political organisation do you
belong to.

MR DIKOKO: In 1985 I was working at the Protea Pharmacy. Because I wasn't
schooling at that time. On Thursday morning when I was on my bicycle to
work, at the bridge, past the Indian centre, there was a Skyline car.
These were the new Skylines on the market. He came very close. When I was
still on my way to town, then I realised that they are not overtaking. It
seems they want to push me out of the road. Then I get on riding until I
got to work. When I arrived at work, then they entered also. Then I began
to realise that these people are members of the security forces. Then I
rushed to the owner of the pharmacy. Then I said to him these people are
members of the security force and they are coming to fetch me, would he
please deny. Then he said to me there is nothing he can do, if the
security forces are there they have to do their work. Then they told him
that they want to meet this guy. He agreed.

	Then we entered the car. Then they took me to the river. It was outside
the boundaries of where people are working. I was handcuffed. Then they
began to beat me with their fists and everything that I should tell them
that what was happening in the township. Then I told them the truthful
answer there, that the chairperson of the (indistinct), though I was
working, but it was around political issues. We were trying to organise
ourselves. The beating went on. After two, I don't remember well. From
there they made me enter the Skyline again. Then they showed me a sack, a
bag which is full of fresh blood, because that blood was

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	T J DIKOKO

stinking. If I don't tell the truth then I will be the same as those
people who were inside those bags.

	Thereafter they took me to the police station. There are rooms in the
police station at the back.

DR RANDERA: There is a note from our translators that they have a
problem. It seems that you are speaking a mixed language and that they
have a difficulty to interpret that. They asked whether you can either
take the ear-phones off or whether you would stick to one language,
please.

MR DIKOKO: Okay, I will try to stick to Tswana.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much.

MR DIKOKO: When we arrived at the police station, they carried on with
their torture. They were applying these electrical appliances on me and
they switched them on and they were electrocuting me. I was naked at the
time. They were continually asking me about Bophelong and I explained
everything to them. This lasted for about 20 minutes.

	We left the police station. They put a balaclava on my head or some
copper of some kind. They said I should go and point out where the
members of the MCD were residing. I went to show them where the members
were residing, the secretaries and other members.

	From there we went back to town. They dropped me off at the bridge that
is leading to Christiana. I was swollen, I was full of blood, but I
managed to walk until I got home. From home we went to Dr Rallie and he
gave me an injection and the tablets.

	I do not know who they are up to this day, these are the faceless
people, but I know was that they were the security force members.

DR RANDERA: Do you wish to add anything else to what you

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	T J DIKOKO

have said already?

MR DIKOKO: Since that incident I suffered from depression and tension and
I have been to hospitals. I still suffer from tension and distress.

DR RANDERA: I just want to come back to what I said earlier. Can you just
tell us something about yourself. Are you married, do you have any
children?

MR DIKOKO: I am married, I have two children.

DR RANDERA: How old are they?

MR DIKOKO: The boy is 12 years old and the daughter is four and a half
years old.

DR RANDERA: And what is your work at the present time?

MR DIKOKO: I am a teacher.

DR RANDERA: Mr Dikoko, you say that you were the chairperson of the
Bophelong Youth Congress at the time, the Bophelong movement. Can you
tell us what else was happening in the township around that period? You
were - in your statement you say you were mainly involved in the youth
political issues. What else was happening in the township that the
security police took such an interest in what you were doing and what was
happening in the township?

MR DIKOKO: I was the chairperson of Bophelong student movement. Even
though I wasn't a scholar, but I was involved. The main reason was to
mobilise the students with regards to politics. The council of the time
was not favoured by the people and the youth was not in favour of such a
council.

DR RANDERA: You also mention that after - sorry, how long did the torture
go on? You were first, from what you were saying, assaulted almost in the
street by the security police and then you were taken to the police
station. How

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	T J DIKOKO

long did the torture go on for?

MR DIKOKO: They took me to the river side, that is where they assaulted
me. I think we left that area at about past two, and from there we went
to the police station, and that is where they applied electric shocks on
me. They were switching them on and off, from time to time.

DR RANDERA: How long did that go on for?

MR DIKOKO: I can't even tell but it was quite some time. If I have to
estimate it can be 10 to 15 minutes of torture.

DR RANDERA: Subsequent to all this that happened to you - this was in
1985, were you harassed continually after that or did the police leave
you alone?

MR DIKOKO: The security forces in Bloemhof was putting an eye on me, but
in 1986 I went to further my studies.

DR RANDERA: Where did you go and study?

MR DIKOKO: I went to Bonamele College of Education in QuaQua.

DR RANDERA: You also said earlier on today that after the torture and the
assault, you were taken to poit out other activists'homes. Were these
activist arrested subsequently?

MR DIKOKO: No, they were not arrested.

DR RANDERA: Thank you, I have no other qusetions. Perhaps my colleagues
would like to ask some questions.

PROF MEIRING: Mr Manthata?

MR MANTHATA: Mr Dikoko, I just seek an explanation. You mentioned
students here and you said you were involved in the political activities.
Dr Randera asked you a question and you gave him an answer, you talked
about the youth that were against the councillors. Now I want to ask
about the students. What were the students' activities?

MR DIKOKO: Briefly, Mr Manthata, you will remember that in

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	T J DIKOKO

1984 the youth spearheaded the fight against apartheid. This was a broad
matter. I do not know how to explain this, but I must say we had games to
play and in these games we were singing. Sometimes we appear as a choir,
but on the other side mobilising the youth. We were actually killing two
birds with one stone.

MR MANTHATA: Now in schools around Bloemhof, would you say the procedure
was just normal? Were the students not in favour of class boycotts?

MR DIKOKO: No.

MR MANTHATA: You have already answered a question relating to the other
office bearers, that they were not arrested. But when you went to further
your studies, what did they do? MR DIKOKO: Some of them also went out to
further their education. Maybe because of the assault, because of the
torture, it was quiet in the township, but some of them decided to go
outside to go and study.

MR MANTHATA: In other words, they didn't have any activities to carry any
more?

MR DIKOKO: No, the activities went on, even though we dispersed. In 1987
and 1988 we came together again, because the country was getting back to
normal, but thereafter again, most of us went to different places.

MR MANTHATA: Are you still in Bloemhof now?

MR DIKOKO: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: As the rehabilitation committee would like to know the
situation within the community of Bloemhof, is there still separation
between those who were fighting against apartheid and those who were for
apartheid?

MR DIKOKO: There is no confusion at all, at this stage. People have
reconciled. There is no conflict of any kind.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	T J DIKOKO

MR MANTHATA: I thank you.

PROF MEIRING: Mr Dikoko, just a few questions from my side, also in
connection with what Mr Manthata said about reparation. At the end of
your written statement you say that you want two things from the Truth
Commission. Firstly is, you want information, you know, you want to know
who were involved in doing this to you and why they did that to you.
Secondly, that you would like to find good medical treatment. Are those
the two things you want to say to us?

MR DIKOKO: Even if they do not come before the Truth Commission, it would
be better if they identify themselves with the changes that are taking
place in this country. I don't mind, even if they don't come, they should
just identify themselves with the change. They should help in the process
of reconciliation. The last request is the medical cost. I think I have
spent over R3 000,00, because I have told you that I was just discharged
from Sunpack Clinic. I would dearly request the rehabilitation and
reparations committee to look into that matter. Those are the only two
requests I have.

PROF MEIRING: The request from my side; you are a teacher and you are a
leader of the Bophelong community in Bloemhof. Many people say that what
we also need by way of reparation in this country, is symbolic things,
like a peace park or a monument or a school. Does that apply to
Bophelong? Do you think that there is a need or an urge for symbolic
reparations of that sort?

MR DIKOKO: I didn't quite understand your question, especially the last
part. Can you repeat your question?

PROF MEIRING: Thank you. I will gladly do that. Many people say that what
the different communities need for reparation,

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	T J DIKOKO

are many things. Also maybe a monument or a peace park or something
special that could remind people of the struggle and of the price the
people had to pay for the struggle, that that will serve as a sign of
hope, as a symbol of reconciliation. Is that true also of Bloemhof? Do
you think a peace park or a monument would suit their purpose?

MR DIKOKO: I think it would be a very good idea. Most people would
appreciate anything that will promote the mission of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. The conflicts of the past, the conflicts
between the AWB and the community, the consumer boycotts, I would really
go along with the people who say there should be a monument of some kind.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. If there are no other questions, thank
you for your testimony. I think Dr Randera would like to say a few words
to you and then you may stand down.

DR RANDERA: Mr Dikoko, thank you very much again for coming today. As we
travel through the country, what is becoming clear, is that the young
people - you were 24 years at the time when this happened to you, but
most of the incidences that are being reported, are from young people
from the ages of 13 to 25. That is the majority of people who were the
casualties, if you like, of this historical period that we are looking
at. I think it is a heavy price. The Chairperson always says that this
democracy that we have now, has been attained through the struggles of
young people like yourself. We have had to pay a very heavy price. We
need to always bear that in mind, even through the work of the Truth
Commission as we go on. I would also like to say

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	T J DIKOKO

that you made the point that you suffer from depression and tension and
you spoke very openly and eloquently today. I think you should be proud
of yourself and your community should be proud of yourself, that, despite
what happened to you, you went on to become a teacher and you are
contributing towards the building of our new nation. Thank you very much.





	-------------











































KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

