	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	 23.09.1996		NAME: PULENG LENAH DITHEJANE

CASE NUMBER: 01391 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 1

_________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Good afternoon, Mr Dithejane. We welcome you. Can you tell us
who is the person with you?

MS DITHEJANE: This is my father, Hendrik Dithejane.

DR RANDERA: Mr Dithejane, good afternoon and welcome to you.

	Puleng, you are 20 years old now and you are coming to tell us about
your sister, Kebogile Elizabeth Dithejane. You are from Tswelelang
Township which is just outside Wolmaransstad. Your sister died on the 3rd
of July 1990, when you were 14 years old.

	Can you first of all tell us about something about yourself and your
family before you go on to tell us about what happened to your sister on
that day.

MS DITHEJANE: I am Pulen Dithejane, the son of Susan and Hendrik. I am
the last born at home. I come from the family of eight, six of them, all
the girls are married except the one who died. All my three brothers
married and my two brothers died and there is one left. I am still at
school. I am at Trebona Secondary School, I am doing Std 9. I am left
with my father and mother. I took that responsibility because I am the
one who is looking after them because all the time I am with them.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much, Puleng. Will you please tell us what
happened on the 3rd of July 1990 to your sister KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	P L DITHEJANE

Kebogile.

MS DITHEJANE: At that time there was unrest in the location. When the
comrades went out to look for support at the various houses. At the time
that they were looking for support at the houses, they came to my house.
They said they are asking for support. Then she agreed to go with them,
because the main issue at that time, was that they intended to ban the
Rev Ngwani's shop, who was regarded as an informer. They did that. What I
remember well, when they arrived at my home it was nine o'clock in the
evening. They came to support to us as usual, then she went with him.
When they arrived at that shop, before they burnt the shop, the police
came and shot with the tear-gas as usual. Then everybody ran his or her
own direction. Some of them were hiding at different places. They were
hiding at the principal's house, because there were many trees outside
and they were sitting under those trees, when others were going to shoot
there.

	Those who were going to burn the house, they ran and the road which she
took, that's where she was injured. It was not her alone, and even some
she was with, were injured. She was shot at the back of the head and part
of her brain fell there. After she was shot, they beat her and her body
changed colour. Her one hand was broken. They took her to hospital. They
took them to hospital. The reason was that when they came back from the
hospital they will take them to the police cells.

	We slept there, not knowing what happened, whether she is safe or not.
On the following day, very early in the morning my uncle came and asked
my father if he knows her. He said yes, I know her, because I have been
looking for her

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	P L DITHEJANE

the whole night in the location, but I didn't find her. Then he told him
that that person is in hospital and the way he was told, she died at six
o'clock at the hospital.

	My father contacted the hospital to find out whether this was true. He
found out that that is true, my sister has died. We also went to confirm
her death and found out that it is true.

	After that these police were not bothering with her because before the
funeral they came to ask my father to come and make a statement, because
they say there is money, he was promised money. We didn't know what that
money was for. They told him to come and make the statement. At the time
he asked, he said should firstly prepare for the funeral, then he will
attend to everything thereafter. He was saying to himself why would they
say he must come and make a statement, knowing that he is doing that.

	The funeral was arranged and it passed. Every day during the mass
actions the police used to come and they used to shoot with the tear-gas
and people used to run away. But they were shooting only tear-gas, they
were not shooting guns to kill.

	On the day of the funeral they were trying to cause confusion. But the
comrades who were there, and other people there at the time, they didn't
pay attention, because they were trying to do their own thing. The
funeral went well. After the funeral they took my father to come and make
the statement. He made the statement. Since it was made, he was not
called or even given that money which he was promised, which he didn't
know why they wanted to give him the money. They did not even give him
the money and we don't know what has happened to the case.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	P L DITHEJANE

DR RANDERA: Puleng, thank you very much for telling us that story. I just
want to ask a few questions for clarification. Your sister was how old
when she died?

MS DITHEJANE: She was 17 years old.

DR RANDERA: You said in your statement and just now again that there was
a great deal of unrest in Tswelelang Township at the time. What was that
all about?

MS DITHEJANE: That unrest, I cannot even understand what caused that,
because schools were disrupted. Police used to come to our schools, and
when they used to come we used to run, run away. Lastly it ended being a
big thing because when we have meetings, when the comrades were doing
their own political things there, then this man we suspected of being a
police informer. It was believed that this is the person who was giving
the information from the location to the police. That is why there was
unrest between the police and the comrades.

DR RANDERA: Did I understand you correctly when you said that when the
comrades came to get your sister, they also said that they were going to
go and burn down the reverend's shop or house?

MS DITHEJANE: On that day they told themselves that they are going to
burn the shop. After the police had shot the tear-gas, and after they had
run away, the comrades came back to burn that shop.

DR RANDERA: So as far as you know there were policemen around the shop at
the time, that were protecting the reverend's property?

MS DITHEJANE: There were no policemen who were guarding that shop. What
made it possible is that every time these policemen would come in and out
of the township and if the

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	P L DITHEJANE

comrades are singing on one side, the police are on the other street, you
know. At that time they were coming straight to the shop and that is the
time when the comrades were trying to burn that shop.

DR RANDERA: Your sister left the shop with other comrades. Was anybody
else injured that night?

MS DITHEJANE: She was amongst the comrades. She was not alone. Two people
died on that day, that is Gaulage and my sister. Others were injured.

DR RANDERA: Two other people died with your sister in that same incident?

MS DITHEJANE: It is my sister and the other girl. My sister was shot in
the head and the other girl was shot in the stomach.

DR RANDERA: The other comrades who were there, did they say to you or to
your father or your mother, who was responsible for the shooting?

MS DITHEJANE: No, they don't know the person who is responsible. Even at
the house, even our comrades, they don't know the person who shot. They
didn't end up seeing exactly who is responsible for shooting.

DR RANDERA: Let me just clarify that question. I am not asking
specifically about a person. Was it the police that were responsible for
shooting or who was responsible for shooting on that night?

MS DITHEJANE: On that day, there were other people whom the police were
giving them the guns, so that they should help them, but I believe that
it is the police, because the police were hiding and those are the people
who were shooting. The people who must take responsibility are the police.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	P L DITHEJANE

DR RANDERA: Sorry, but there were other people who were given guns by the
police?

MS DITHEJANE: We would see that when we have our political activities, we
would see police handing guns to other people to help them, but on that
day it was done by the police people themselves.

DR RANDERA: In other places that we have been to, vigilante groupings
were formed, who were supporting the councillors or maybe supporting
other people. Were there vigilante groupings in Tswelelang at the time?

MS DITHEJANE: I beg your pardon? May you repeat your question, Sir?

DR RANDERA: I will repeat my question. Were there any vigilante
groupings, these people whom the police were giving guns to, were they in
opposition or were they part of another political party or who were they?

MS DITHEJANE: Yes, I know they are there.

DR RANDERA: Do you know who they were at that time?

MS DITHEJANE: No, Sir.

DR RANDERA: I don't have any more questions to ask you. I will hand over
to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Prof Meiring?

PROF MEIRING: Just one question, if you don't mind. You mentioned the Rev
Linkwane whose shop they wanted to burn down. Did the family Linkwane
still live in the township?

MS DITHEJANE: Yes, they are still there.

PROF MEIRING: Have you talked to them or have your parents talked to them
about the incident?

MS DITHEJANE: No, this Mr Linkwane, he used to come to our house and he
doesn't even come to my father, coming to talk about things. My father
was not anxious to ask him about

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	P L DITHEJANE

that incident, because he said what has happened has happened. So he took
it that way. They are friendly and they are still friendly now.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you, Sis Puleng, your dad and all the family
members for coming to talk to us. We sympathise with you. We are weak and
we don't have enough words with which to encourage you and comfort you.
But you may know that even when you give evidence you are among people
who are your friends and who understand your experience. It is only God
who can encourage and give you the courage and the power to help you.
This is the same God whom we asked that he should help us. We will try
and find out the truth about this incident so that we can know exactly
who are responsible for this incident. But we leave you with these words;
that when you look around you will see that these people did not
sacrifice for nothing. Because today we are a different people. We have
our democratic leaders whom we have elected ourselves, because of your
sister's contribution.



	--------------



















KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

