


	1	A D DODO

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	11.11.1996	NAME:	A D DODO

CASE: - 		KRUGERSDORP

DAY 1

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: While Mrs Dodo is coming to the table can I just make a few
other announcements. Please, if you have cell phones can you switch them
off. We also have statement takers at the back of the hall. So if anybody
wishes to make a statement today or over the next three days, our
statement takers will be available. Joyce you will take the oath.

MS SEROKE: The oath.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I will just let you welcome her alright.

MS SEROKE: Good morning Mrs Dodo. We welcome you. Who are you with?

MRS DODO: I am with my son.

MS SEROKE: We also welcome you Mr Dodo. Mam, will you please get up so
that you can take your oath before you give your statement.

MRS DODO: (Duly sworn in, states).

MS SEROKE: Thank you mam.

CHAIRPERSON: Welcome. Are you comfortable.

MRS DODO: Yes, I am comfortable, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Is this your son Bennet?

MRS DODO: No, it is not Bennet, Sir. Bennet is my youngest. This is my
elder son. It is not Bennet.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Dodo, you have come to tell us a story that involves not
only your husband, but three of your

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	A D DODO

children. I want you to take your time in telling that story, but before
you do that perhaps you can just tell us something about yourself. How
old are you? How many children do you have? Are you working?

MRS DODO: I am not working. I am 65 years of age. I am 55 years of age, I
have eight children. That number includes those who are deceased as well.

CHAIRPERSON: We are going to 1990. Again in Khutsong and I want you to
tell us what happened.

MRS DODO: It was the 15th of June 1990. The police entered our house
looking for my husband. They asked who Pitcherman is and I said it is my
son. There was a lot of them. There were Caspers outside my house. They
all alighted from the Casper and they beat my child up and they left him
lying on the lawn. It was at about five. We helped him up. At about seven
the Casper came again. Two police alighted from the Casper. They threw
teargas around. We ran away. The police threw something from the Casper
and there was an explosion and our house was burnt down. They went back
to the Casper and drove off. My next-door neighbour jumped over the fence
to help my husband. He dragged my husband outside. The house was on fire.
After they dragged him out he took a hosepipe and splashed over the house.

	Everytime the Casper comes we run away. The police that set my house
alight denied all even though I saw that he is the one who set my house
on fire. By the time we managed to put the fire out, my house was already
badly damaged. It was the 15th of June. My husband got really ill. We
tried to take him to the doctor in town. We were there the whole day.
This was the 15th. The doctors there had no time for someone who had been
beaten by the police. KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	A D DODO

This doctor use to come to the township. We took him to him. He said that
two of my husbands ribs were very, very damaged. They were actually
crushed. That is why he would not be able to walk. He had to go for
treatment each day. My husband has been ill from then. Now even his mind,
his brain does not function well. He is slightly demented. 	Bennet got
home at about midnight. The police took him around midnight. Then they
took him to Welverdien. I asked what he had done. They said I must shut
up because I do not know anything. He later told us that he was in
Welverdien. They were torturing him asking where the guns that were
brought by a van were. He then said he does not know anything about the
guns. They said that it is Heinie's van that brought the guns. He said
that he was tortured, electrocuted. He says he fell down and when he
arose a policeman, white policeman came and he took the belt that was
around my waist, put it around my neck and hung me. He said he then fell
and he slept.

	 When he got up in the morning he was asked yet again where the guns
were. He said he had never seen them. They insisted that these guns were
at the house. They said that the whole Dodo family were going to tell the
truth. This was in Welverdien. They took a bucket and a cloth. Then he
was told to clean the van. The van was full of blood. He had to wash the
blood off the van. He said his back was aching at the time. After that he
was told to go home. He said he went home and then on the main road a van
picked him up to take him to Potchefstroom. When he got home he was
limping and his back was bent, his backbone was crooked. The police came
yet again. The Casper was packed with police.

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	A D DODO

Norman does not stay at home. He comes now and again. They called him and
requested his ID. They then said you are a member of the Dodo family. He
said yes. They then said they want guns. He said he does not know
anything about guns. They beat him up. They beat him up, threw him into
the house. I told them that this child does not stay here. He does not
stay here. Then they beat him up even more. This was another day
altogether. They left him behind lying helpless. I asked have they
injured you badly. He said I will heal. I said that he must go to the
doctor. He said he will not go. The doctors here do not care about the
people. They did not take care of my father.

	On the 9th of October, this is the day he did not go to work. The 10th
of October was a public holiday. This is when he just fell and died. I
called the police. The police did not come on that day. It was a Friday.
The police would come to my house everyday, but when I called them they
did not come. They came on the Friday asking where the deceased was. I
kept quiet. They asked yet again where is the one who is deceased.
Eventually I said he is at the mortuary. They then said he is not the one
that we wanted to kill. They said that they wanted Pitcherman. They said
even he I would find at the mortuary. This is around the 10th or the 11th.

	On the 17th they shot him. I was still trying to get over the first
death. I was still mourning. On the day that they shot him I knew, I felt
that they are shooting Tamsange. I said the police had just left. They
said I would find Tamsange at the mortuary and I heard the sound. I heard
the bullet sound and they were shooting Tamsange close by. I did not see
anyone shooting Tamsange. I saw him KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	A D DODO

in court. I did not know them. I just heard the sounds. I have no first
hand witness to say that so and so shot him. 	These children stayed both
dead. We requested that Pitcherman comes to the funeral. They then said
that he first needs to be operated on. It was a week before he was
released. Our lawyer went to the police station to request this. We
buried both his children on the 27th of August. The father was ill at the
time. After that funeral my husband was demented.

	The court case took a week. Photographs were taken of the house that was
burnt down. The Attorney asked how can you shoot someone that you have
arrested. They responded saying that it is the Law that instructs us to
kill him. We have killed him. This was over a week. The court case,
nothing came of the court case. They said we would meet in Johannesburg
and they would tell us the truth. It has been five years since then and
nothing has happened.

CHAIRPERSON: Mama Dodo, is there anything else you want to add to your
story?

MRS DODO: This is not all that happened, but I cannot continue talking. I
have no house, I have no home. They burnt my house down. Even if the
storms come, the winds, the rains, I have no shelter.

	Tamsange was in jail for three months. I tried to get him out of jail.
They would insist that he was not there for three months. The day that I
saw him I could not even recognise him. His head was swollen, his eyes
sunken. He said to me, mother it is me. I said it is not you, it cannot
be. He said he was in solitary confinement, I am in solitary confinement.
They poured cold water, ice-cold water on me day and night. They said
that I must tell them

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	A D DODO

where the guns were that Heinie had brought. I do not even Heinie he
said. I think I have finished. This is all I have to say.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Dodo, would you like to have a glass of water before I
ask a few more questions? Can I ask a few questions?

MRS DODO: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Mama Dodo I just want to clarify some things
first. On the day that your husband was beaten up, on the 15th of June,
you say the police first arrived and they beat up one of your other sons.
Which son was beaten up?

MRS DODO: Norman.

CHAIRPERSON: And I just want to clarify about your husband. You say that
he is now demented.

MRS DODO: Yes, after the beatings he improved after a while, he could
walk, but he was demented. We would have to find him as he would get lost
all the time.

CHAIRPERSON: But he passed away in 1992, is that right?

MRS DODO: Yes, he passed away in January 1992, on the 30th of January.

CHAIRPERSON: And Bennet was also arrested the same day as your house was
burnt down.

MRS DODO: No, not on the same day. It was before when they hung him. Our
house was not burnt down yet.

CHAIRPERSON: Okay, and then you lost two other sons. Norman who was
beaten up and then died a few days later. Is that right?

MRS DODO: Yes, he passed away. Norman passed away and Richard.

CHAIRPERSON: Now Richard is the one they were looking for. KRUGERSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	A D DODO

Is Richard the same person as Pitcherman.

MRS DODO: Pitcherman was his nickname.

CHAIRPERSON: And then you also mentioned what happened to Tamsange. Now
he was also arrested at the same time.

MRS DODO: It is the same person. Tamsange, Richard and Pitcherman, it is
the same person.

CHAIRPERSON: But you talk of Richard or Tamsange being arrested first.
Was this before he was shot?

MRS DODO: It was before he was shot because he was in prison for three
months. They shot him in 1990.

CHAIRPERSON: And on the day that he was shot you also mentioned that
there were three witnesses and you have given the names of these people
as Mungi, Lennie Monareng and Mrs Martha Musnki. Is that right?

MRS DODO: Yes, it is so. I saw them in court.

CHAIRPERSON: Mama Dodo, can you try and tell us why you think the Dodo
family was singled out by the police for so much attention, harassment
and eventually killing of two of your sons?

MRS DODO: They claimed that Richard thought he was too intelligent.
Apparently he is the one who brought the spirit of the struggle in the
township. Nkosi uttered these statements. They said that he had corrupted
the township. He was teaching the other children about things that
happened in 1912. They said that they would get him, he thinks he knows
too much.

CHAIRPERSON: How old was Richard. Sorry.

MRS DODO: I was not there at the time. I do not know exactly what was
happening. Only Tamsange would know what he did.

CHAIRPERSON: How old was Tamsange at the time, when he

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	A D DODO

died.?

MRS DODO: He was about 18 years of age. He gave up on his schooling
because the police were after him all the time.

CHAIRPERSON: Do you know anything about these guns the police kept taking
about?

MRS DODO: They searched and looked all over from corner to corner. The
toilets that we were using at the time, the bucket system. They would
even search in the toilets. They did not find them. They would break my
dishes looking for these, they would throw everything aside. They never
found them. Every single day they would do the same thing. I would not
even lock or close my door because they were going to come.

CHAIRPERSON: Mama Dodo I just want to mention that our research document
talks about Richard Pitcherman Dodo being a witness in the killing of
Eugene Embulawo who was supposedly shot by somebody called Venter
Rampete. Do you remember anything about that?

MRS DODO: No, I know nothing of this. I do not know anything about it.
They were all together in jail. I do not know.

CHAIRPERSON: Mama Dodo, I just want to ask my last question and that is
you say that you have no home. Where are you staying at the moment?

MRS DODO: I stay in a shack. If it rains I have to go next door. My house
is just zincs.

CHAIRPERSON: But who do you live with?

MRS DODO: I stay with the two boys and a girl.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much Mama Dodo. I do not know whether my
colleagues would want to ask any further questions.

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	9	N A NOMANDLA

MS SEROKE: Mrs Dodo, are you on pension?

MRS DODO: Yes, I am.

MS SEROKE: And your house, as it was burnt down, is there somebody
staying there.

MRS DODO: I stay there.

MS SEROKE: As it is?

MRS DODO: Yes, as it is.

MS SEROKE: What is your request to the TRC mam?

MRS DODO: I think that they should do something about my house. I stay
outside. I got a bit of hope because there were photographers and lawyers
coming. Also an ANC lawyer. They came and took photographs, but they
never did anything about it.

MS SEROKE: Thank you mam, we have heard your request. We will pass on the
request.

CHAIRPERSON: Within a very short period of time you lost three very
important people in your family and you also lost your home. Can you tell
us what support there has been for you from the community or from the
Church, any other organisation that you have appealed to?

MRS DODO: I did not get anything. I did not get anything. I got blankets
from my employers because everything was burnt down.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mama Dodo. Mama Dodo, we have no further
questions. We thank you very, very much for coming today to talk about
this very painful part of your life.

	Last week I sat at a, not last week, the week before, I sat at a hearing
in Alexandra where we heard a mother, again, talking about the loss of
three sons. All within a very short period of time and, again, there are
so many mothers throughout the country who have come and who have

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	10	N A NOMANDLA

talked about the loss of their children, the loss of their husbands.
Often, mothers have not known what their sons or daughters were involved
in in terms of the struggle that people fought and there may be other
reasons that we need to find out about as we go through the stories that
we are going to be hearing today and as our investigations will reveal,
but I hope today that you have got some comfort from coming to talk about
these stories.

	I also hope that the councilling services, the councilling people who
are here today will give you as much support as is necessary through the
next few weeks and months. Thank you very much for coming.

MRS DODO: I also thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mama Dodo, is there anything else you want to say before you
leave?

MRS DODO: I have nothing further to say. I have said it all.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mama Dodo.



























KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

