
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	09-04-1997	

NAME:	NELSON SAKUMZI DUMA

CASE: 	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 3

___________________________________

REVD XUNDU:	Nelson Sakumzi Duma, please stand.

NELSON SAKUMZI DUMA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Mr Chairman, the witness has been duly sworn in.

CHAIRMAN:	Ntsiki Sandi.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairman. Let us commence Mr Duma. Mr Duma you
are a resident at Fort Beaufort. The incident which you are going to
speak about is a Fort Beaufort incident, it took place at Fort Beaufort.

	Could you very briefly tell us about this incident? In Fort Beaufort in
1985, what was happening? What was the situation like there at the time,
could you just give us an indication?

MR DUMA:	At the time, there were many incidents of necklace murders.
Chairperson, at the time necklace murders were rife and I was shot while
my cousin who was being harassed by police and his girlfriend was
pregnant and I was staying with his girlfriend who was pregnant, who was
due to deliver at any time.

ADV SANDI:	Who were shooting at the people and why?

MR DUMA:	They were being shot at by the Municipal police.

ADV SANDI:	What were the Magolotte?

MR DUMA:	There were people who were arguing about Council positions,
positions for Councillorship.

ADV SANDI:	And on whose side were they?

MR DUMA:	They were on the Mayor's side, Mr Nohashe who was the Mayor at
Fort Beaufort.

ADV SANDI:	Were they cooperating with the police?

MR DUMA:	Yes, they were cooperating with the police.

ADV SANDI:	Let us come to this day that you were talking about, you say
you came out of the house?

MR DUMA:	Yes, it was dusk. And at the time ...

ADV SANDI:	Could you please slow down and speak a bit more audibly? Is
there anyone you heard talking before you were shot?

MR DUMA:	Yes. Somebody said shoot Boyce. There was stoning incidents
there at the time as well.

ADV SANDI:	Could you please slow down Mr Duma. Can you hear the way I am
speaking, please speak at this pace.

	The person who was saying attack Boyce, who was that?

MR DUMA:	That was where the Mgungwani's were armed. Boyce is a policeman,
but he was a councillor at the time and he was told to attack me.

ADV SANDI:	Did he strike you?

MR DUMA:	Yes, he struck me under my right arm pit.

ADV SANDI:	Did he say why he was shooting at you?

MR DUMA:	There was stone throwing and incidents of toyi-toying at the
time.

ADV SANDI:	Did you know Boyce prior to the shooting?

MR DUMA:	Yes, I knew him.

ADV SANDI:	Did you people ever have an argument?

MR DUMA:	No, but we never had an argument between the two of us.

ADV SANDI:	What was the position between the organisation which you
supported and the one which Boyce supported?

MR DUMA:	I was a member of the ANC and he was on the side of APLA and on
the side of the Mgungwani, who were the Municipal police. The Mgungwani,
seemed to support APLA. They are now the SAPS.

ADV SANDI:	Did you go to hospital after you were shot?

MR DUMA:	Yes, the investigators gave me a letter which I was to take to
the surgery of Dr Klaassen who treated me and said that there was nothing
much wrong with me but ...

ADV SANDI;	Do you still have a bullet in your body?

MR DUMA:	Yes, I still do.

ADV SANDI:	How many of them are there?

MR DUMA:	It is only one.

ADV SANDI:	Are you still receiving any treatment for the pellets that are
in your body?

MR DUMA:	No.

ADV SANDI:	Is that all that you would like to say sir?

MR DUMA:	Yes, that is all.

ADV SANDI:	Is there any wish you would like to express or request you
would like to make?

MR DUMA:	I am here to tell the people what the situation was like at the
time. I am just here to tell people what things were like at the time,
although in Fort Beaufort I am regarded as a crazy person. I am currently
still under treatment from the mental institution at Fort Beaufort.

	Yes, I still went to the hospital for treatment last Friday.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Mr Duma.

MR DUMA:	Thank you.

CHAIRMAN:	June Crichton?

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. You say that you, Mr Duma, you say
that you know Boyce from when you were

children together. Did you ever talk about joining up with the police?
Did you discuss it ever and did he ever give you a reason as to why he
did that?

MR DUMA:	 No, he never gave me any reason for doing that. He was part of
the older group, he was amongst the older boys, he was not my peer. He
never gave me any reasons.

MS CRICHTON:	And the second question is who is the person Nomonde
Motinise, the witness?

MR DUMA:	Nomonde Motinise was my brother's girlfriend, who was sentenced
to 21 years. I think she is teaching at Transkei now.

MS CRICHTON:	But she was a witness to the incident?

MR DUMA:	Yes, it happened before her because I was staying with her at
the time, she was due to deliver any time.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you very much Mr Duma.

CHAIRMAN:	Ntsiki Sandi?

ADV SANDI:	The lady you refer to, Nomonde, you say that you were staying
with her, taking care of her?

MR DUMA:	Yes, because my brother was being harassed, the police were
looking for him so he couldn't stay at home, and I had to stay with her,
because she was pregnant and due to deliver at any time. And when I was
shot, I was on my way to the toilet. She stayed close to where the people
used to be set alight and the people were against them, and I was staying
with her to ensure that she was not attacked.

ADV SANDI:	When did you drop out of school?

MR DUMA:	I dropped out of school in 1984, in standard nine.

CHAIRMAN:	Sakumzi, thank you. You gave your testimony very fast, at least
we heard what you had to say.

	We have taken note of what you have said here and perhaps our
investigators will get in touch with you again

and see if they can get a statement from Mr Motinise. For the moment, we
thank you.

	--------------------

