


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 12.02.97			NAME: MZWANDILE JOSEPH DYWILI

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________

MZWANDILE JOSEPH DYWILI: (sworn states)

MR SANDI: What is your clan name?

MR DYWILI: Mhlatu Jambas.

MR SANDI: Thank you. We have a statement before us that you have given us
that you got injured and also Henry Qatana. Could you tell us what was
happening that day. The atmosphere at the township as well so that we
have a picture of what was going on.

MR DYWILI: It was on the 29th of November 1986, we had a party in a room.
One of my friends got out just to walk around the yard. A moment after
that we heard a policeman walking around. Siphithiphithi then walked out
of the house also to go and see what was happening. After we'd walked out
we heard a gunshot. When Henry Qatana also went out to see what was
happening we discovered that Siphithiphithi had already been shot and had
actually already passed away.

	When Henry Qatana tried to lift him up to bring him inside we heard a
voice asking where we are taking him and ordered us to leave him,
whereupon someone shot Henry in the head. I also got out to see what was
happening and as I was walking towards the kitchen I got shot in the hand.

	The ambulance then arrived together with police and took us to the
hospital.

MR SANDI: Who was shooting?

MR DYWILI: We were being shot at by special constables. At the hospital
there was a policeman guarding us. We then sent a report that we don't
want him there because we have not done anything. He then left. 	

	I was discharged after two weeks and the police came to fetch me and
sent me to jail. The third week, after Henry had been discharged, he also
was ten to jail. Five of our friends were there already because we were
toytoying in the street. We were in detention for three months before we
got released but we had to go and sign the charge office, twice a day, in
the morning and in the evening.

MR SANDI: Excuse me is Mike Kob a lawyer?

MR DYWILI: Yes he was our attorney who helped us out.

MR SANDI: So you say there are some of those Kitskonstabels that you know
by name?

MR DYWILI: Vuyani shot at us.

MR SANDI: Vuyani Tyali?

MR DYWILI: Yes.

MR SANDI: And the others?

MR DYWILI: Bhabhatane, Noppeise and Ncamile.

MR SANDI: Are those people still around in the community?

MR DYWILI: Yes they are. Vuyani however died in Johannesburg.

MR SANDI: Was there a court case because Vuyani had shot people?

MR DYWILI: We were acquited then they told us that he was going to be
sentenced in Grahamstown. They just left him to go wherever he wanted to
until he ended up in Johannesburg.

MR SANDI: He was not sentenced?

MR DYWILI: No he was not sentenced.

MR DYWILI: Do you get any compensation from the Government?

MR DYWILI: We put in a claim but they did not respond.

MR SANDI: Which attorney did you use?

MR DYWILI: Magqabi.

MR SANDI: So therefore if we investigate, we can contact them?

MR DYWILI: Yes.

MR SANDI: So therefore you're not working any longer because you're ill?

MR DYWILI: Yes the pellets were never removed from my hand and when I
work they bother me.

MR SANDI: Do you have children and a wife?

MR DYWILI: Yes I do.

MR SANDI: How many children?

MR DYWILI: Two children.

MR SANDI: Are they at school?

MR DYWILI: Yes.

MR SANDI: What do you think the Commission can do for you?

MR DYWILI: Can the Commission help me support my children and educate
them please?

MR SANDI: Are you getting any form of disability grant?

MR DYWILI: NO I don't get anything.

MR SANDI: Is there something else perhaps that you would like us to look
at.

MR DYWILI: If the Commission could please help us with the claim that we
put with the attorneys?

MR SANDI: Were you a member of any political organisation that the police
were so much against you?

MR DYWILI: Yes the UDF. We were all together with Vuyani and them but
then they took the job as constables. It was clear then that even then
when we were just sitting and having fun it seemed as if we were planning
something.

MR SANDI: What were you in the organisation?

MR DYWILI: I was just a member.

MR SANDI: I will hand you over to Mr Chairperson now.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you very much Joseph Dywili, your story was very
clear. We have noted down your requests and are going to hand them over
to our President. That is what we do with requests of all victims who
have either been injured, tortured or whose loved ones have passed away.
It is up to the President what to do with the requests. Thank you.

MR DYWILI: Thank you Sir.

	---------------------------------





