TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	9TH JUNE 1997

NAME:	MISS THEMBAKAZI TUKU

HELD AT:	EAST LONDON

CASE:	EC368/96 - ELN

DAY 1

____________________________________________________________________

REV FINCA: We’ll now call Thembakazi Tuku to come forward.

MR THEMBAKAZI TUKU: (sworn states)

REV FINCA: June Crichton?

MS CRICHTON: Are you wanting me to speak in English to you?

MISS TUKU: Yes okay.

MS CRICHTON: Then I can take these off and that will be nice. You’re here
this afternoon to speak about your brother, Thembisile and to tell us
what happened to him when he went into exile. I’m going to let you tell
your story uninterrupted but before you do that just let me get it quite
clear that he went into exile in ‘78 into Botswana, is that correct?

MISS TUKU: Yes that’s correct.

MS CRICHTON: Would you like to just carry on and tell us the story please.

MISS TUKU: In 1990 the ANC sent us a ticket to Botswana for my aunt and
myself. When we arrived in Botswana on a Friday afternoon we were told
that somebody from exile was going to meet us but we didn’t see anybody
there.

MS CRICHTON: Can I just interrupt you, I actually think it’s going to be
easier for you if you speak in Xhosa. Do you mind if you start again
because I would like everybody to hear and I can perfectly all right
through these, all right?

MISS TUKU: Alright. In 1990 we received tickets from the Border Council
of Churches because we requested to go to my brother’s grave. We left on
a Thursday evening and got to Johannesburg where we were going to take a
flight on the Friday morning to Botswana. We had been promised that there
would be people who would meet us at the airport however there was nobody.

	We tried to phone the ANC Headquarters and told them that nobody had
come to meet us at the airport and we requested help. They said that
they’d sent two people from Lusaka but these two people had been arrested
by the Botswana Security Branch because they had no visas and were told
to go back to Lusaka. They then said they would phone somebody from
Botswana to organise accommodation for us and we went to a motel. This
man said he was scared because the ANC had been banned in Botswana. This
person said he would organise a lady from Botswana, a lady that my
brother and his girlfriend had been staying with. It was these people who
were going to take us to my brother’s grave, but nobody came the whole of
Friday and on Saturday morning we phoned Lusaka again asking for help. We
needed direction and we had no money. It was the ANC that promised that
everything would be organised. My aunt knew somebody who lent her some
money and we tried to buy some food at the motel.

	Late on Saturday ANC men who were in the underground structure came to
us and told us to wait for a lady that was going to come and tell us
everything. I said that I didn’t even want to know what happened, all I
wanted was to see my brother’s grave. The report then was that if the
Botswana police found out that we were ANC people, our lives would be in
danger. Sunday morning I phoned Lusaka and they told us that Comrade
Chowa was on his way from Lusaka. He apparently used public transport to
come down. Sunday evening these people arrived, Chris was his name.

	The following morning we were supposed to go with them to the grave. I
begged them for information and the one tried to tell me that Comrade
Thembisile died in a way that they too could not explain. They said they
found him in his room and he’d already passed away. His gun was in his
hand and he was under a mattress. What shocked them about the situation
was that nobody was allowed to go to his funeral except for three people
who were allowed to attend, the Priest, his landlady and his girlfriend.
All I wanted was to go to the graveyard.

	Late on Monday Chowa who was an exile phoned, he was in the Botswana Sun
Hotel and he came to our motel and told us that he arrived in Botswana on
the Sunday, the police arrested him and interrogated him with regard to
our presence in Botswana as well as his presence. We thanked Chowa and
came back to South Africa on the Tuesday not having found anything about
my brother and not having seen his grave.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you, I need to ask you a few questions now. Lets go
right back to the beginning, he was resident here in East London before
he went to Botswana, is that right?

MISS TUKU: Yes.

MS CRICHTON: You say that when he was found in his room you were told
that he was already dead, he was under a mattress and he had his gun in
his hand. Who was it that gave you that information?

MISS TUKU: It was one of the Comrades who were there.

MS CRICHTON: What was his name?

MISS TUKU: It was Victor?

MS CRICHTON: Somebody Victor, is that his surname or is it a first name?

MISS TUKU: First name.

MS CRICHTON: His first name?

MISS TUKU: His first name.

MS CRICHTON: Were there wounds on the body or was he just holding his
gun, was he shot or was he just ...?

MISS TUKU: I really don’t know.

MS CRICHTON: You don’t know about that? So you’re then saying that the
funeral took place and even now you have not been told where the grave
is? When last did you approach the ANC for help? When you went up there
it was in 1990, have you been back to the ANC since?

MISS TUKU: I didn’t go back to the ANC.

MS CRICHTON: In your statement and in your requests you actually say that
if the body was ever buried in Botswana, you seem uncertain as to whether
body was actually buried there, is that correct? Are you uncertain about
it?

MISS TUKU: I’m uncertain about it because I didn’t see the grave.

MS CRICHTON: You might have heard us earlier speaking about the second
submission of the ANC to the TRC in which a public commitment was made
that records of circumstances like this that people are unsure about,
they are prepared to assist us with information and so all we can say to
you now having heard your story is that we will look at those records and
see if more can be found out. Is there a particular request that you have
to the Commission other than the fact that you want to know where he was
buried and that you would like his body to be brought back?

MISS TUKU: There’s nothing else.

MS CRICHTON: How old was he when he left?

MISS TUKU: He was about thirty five years.

MS CRICHTON: Did he leave dependants behind, children?

MISS TUKU: No children.

MS CRICHTON: And there were no children in Botswana that you know about?

MISS TUKU: No.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you, I’ll hand you back to the Chairperson.

REV FINCA: Thembakazi I would just like to clarify the issue of
Thembisile being shot under mysterious circumstances according to your
statement in his flat in Botswana. If we are going to successfully
investigate this matter please tell us what do you suspect happened to
Thembisile?

MISS TUKU: We think that he was shot because it does not make sense that
somebody would be found under a mattress with a gun and that person and
that person committed suicide. We would like to know what happened.

REV FINCA: Are there any rumours that he perhaps was shot by people from
Botswana or maybe ANC Comrades?

MISS TUKU: No.

REV FINCA: Therefore you have no knowledge of what happened to him at all?

MISS TUKU: No, after we received a telegram from Lusaka Mr Mzamu of the
Special Branch wanted to find out where the telegram was and the contents
of the telegram because he said the ANC was cruel, filthy and it does not
care about it’s people. We only received the telegram quite a while after
Thembisile had died and after he died the ANC did nothing. There was no
compensation and no financial support whatsoever.

REV FINCA: I think you endeavoured to find out what happened after the
ANC was banned, did you try?

MISS TUKU: No.

REV FINCA: Any particular reasons why you didn’t or didn’t you think that
you’ll find any substantial information?

MISS TUKU: No reason.

REV FINCA: You said only the Priest, the landlady and the girlfriend were
at the funeral. Did you ever talk to this lady?

MISS TUKU: No.

REV FINCA: Do you know where they are?

MISS TUKU: No not at all.

REV FINCA: Thembakazi, I will thank you together with those that are
going to give their evidence just now. Please step down.

------------------------------------









