
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	11 JUNE 1997		

NAME:	MANDLA ENGELANI

CASE:		EC12/96	-	MDANTSANE

DAY:		3

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you Mandla. How do you
pronounce your surname?

MR ENGELANI: It is Engelani.

CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you Mr Mandla Engelani. We will hand over to
Reverend Xundu to help you take an oath.

REV XUNDU: Mandla please stand up.

MANDLA ENGELANI: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Mr Chairperson, he has properly sworn in.

CHAIRPERSON: We will hand over to you Reverend Xundu to lead him with
questions.

REV XUNDU: We welcome you Mr Engelani. What is your clan name Sir?

MR ENGELANI: I am Dakwende.

REV XUNDU: Dakwende, please tell us briefly your story so that we can be
able to know what happened to you.

MR ENGELANI: I would like to start on the 1985 massacre in Duncan
Village. I was at home. There was one man distributing pamphlets. What I
am saying now is not in my statement. Before this man could come there
was one man who came saying that there are people distributing pamphlets
around. He said that these people are dangerous people and he said that
if I saw a person who was distributing pamphlets of a guerrilla warfare I
must be careful, because they are dangerous. That is what this man said.
I asked him whether I can quote his name, because he is the one who gave
me this information. He said, no, I must not quote his name, because if I
did they will assassinate me, they will point me and kill me. He then
left me.	

	The following day after he gave me this message this person came, the
one who was distributing pamphlets. He said to me as I was a person who
use to read different books, he said to me I have these books for you to
read. I took one of them and it was written Guerrilla Warfare. He said
that as I was a wise man I am supposed to read this, because people from
Westbank are wise people. So they said that they would like me to join
them.

REV XUNDU: Let us get some clarity Sir. These people were AZAPO members?

MR ENGELANI: He did not identify him as belonging to any member.

REV XUNDU: But you are a member of AZAPO, you were a member of AZAPO at
the time?

MR ENGELANI: At that time I got along with members of AZAPO, because we
use to attend the same school.

REV XUNDU: In your statement you say that you are a member of AZAPO?

MR ENGELANI: Yes, but I had no membership card. I had no membership card
at that time.

REV XUNDU: Was there any conflict between this organisation?

MR ENGELANI: Mr Chairperson, let me put it this way. When the white man
came to attack us we fought back. As we were fighting with them, the
Boers from the army, after that we, these people came saying that they do
not want an AZAPO organisation. We heard this, we heard that this was
happening in Port Elizabeth, but it was happening also in Duncan Village.

REV XUNDU: This led to this day that you were attacked.

MR ENGELANI: Yes Sir, because these people accused me of being close to
AZAPO members.

REV XUNDU: You were attacked by the Residents Committee?

MR ENGELANI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: And you were brought to a People's Court.

MR ENGELANI: What happened is that I got a message that I was going to be
attacked and I decided to stay at home. These people came to my home.

REV XUNDU: Did you know these people, came to your home?

MR ENGELANI: I do not want to lie Sir. I never saw them before, but I
only recognised two of them, because they are my neighbours. I asked one
of my neighbour saying that you are also part of this. He said, yes, I am
part of this, because you are a member of AZAPO. We are fighting against
AZAPO and South African Municipality and we are fighting against the
Government in Pretoria. That is what this man said to me.

REV XUNDU: Did you know any AZAPO members who were also attacked in this
way?

MR ENGELANI: They were not attacked in a similar way Sir, but there are
others who were attacked, but not in a similar way.

REV XUNDU: They assaulted you and they left you there?

MR ENGELANI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Who was with you at home? Who witnessed this?

MR ENGELANI: I was together with my sisters.

REV XUNDU: They saw this and they can give evidence?

MR ENGELANI: Yes, they were there and they can come and given evidence.

REV XUNDU: You were taken to hospital?

MR ENGELANI: Yes, but I did not go to a free hospital, because it was
difficult at that time. I came to Mdantsane in the clinic in NU9. I spent
a night to my brother in NU11A and I would go to the clinic every
morning, but unfortunately, in the clinic they told me to go to the
doctor and I was then taken to the hospital.

REV XUNDU: Did you lay a charge concerning this matter?

MR ENGELANI: Yes, I tried when I was released from the hospital, because
my doctor said I was badly injured. These people wanted to kill me. The
doctors advised me to go and lay a charge. I went to the UDF offices in
Paverville and they said that they heard about this incident. They said
that those who attacked me were the thugs. So the UDF office said that
they did not know whether they were AZAPO members of UDF members. They
told me to go to the police.

REV XUNDU: Did you go to the police?

MR ENGELANI: Yes, I did.

REV XUNDU: What happened to that case?

MR ENGELANI: I went to the Office of Intimidation. They were then
arrested, but the case did not get anywhere. They were not sentenced.

REV XUNDU: Sir, what do you expect the Commission to do for you?

MR ENGELANI: What I would like the Commission to do for me is that I am
attending Wits College. I would like to get a bursary to further my
studies.

REV XUNDU: Where are you studying?

MR ENGELANI: I am studying at Wits, Witwatersrand.

REV XUNDU: Do you have a wife?

MR ENGELANI: I have a girlfriend and I am staying with her.

REV XUNDU: You are only staying together?

MR ENGELANI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Reverend Finca can help you to get married if you want to.

MR ENGELANI: I will be very glad if he can do that.

REV XUNDU: Chairperson, let me hand over to you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Sandi.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairman. Mr Engelani, I am going to make a
request that the two questions I am going to ask, you must listen to them
very carefully. If you did not understand the question you may ask me to
repeat it and when you answer please try to be brief. If it is possible
you can just say yes or no. Do you understand me Sir?

MR ENGELANI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Was there an AZAPO organisation in Duncan Village?

MR ENGELANI: Yes, it is only a few people who belonged to AZAPO in Duncan
Village.

ADV SANDI: Was there a conflict between AZAPO and UDF or any other
organisation?

MR ENGELANI: In Duncan Village when we got out of soccer offices there
was a conflict.

ADV SANDI: After the funeral, the mass funeral, of the 45 people who were
assassinated, were there any other people in Duncan Village who were
attacked because of belonging to AZAPO before you were attacked?

MR ENGELANI: I do not know. They would be arrested and detained, but
nobody would be attacked.

ADV SANDI: After your attack was there any people, were there any people
in Duncan Village who were attacked because of belonging to AZAPO?

MR ENGELANI: I do not know, because I was in hospital. I was not aware of
what was happening.

ADV SANDI: The People's Court you referred to in your statement, what was
it duty?

MR ENGELANI: They would go house to house.

ADV SANDI: Doing what?

MR ENGELANI: They were against members of the AZAPO.

ADV SANDI: What would they do to members of AZAPO as they were against
AZAPO?

MR ENGELANI: They would assault members of AZAPO and they would say that
they are against AZAPO and South African Communist Party together with
the Government in Pretoria.

ADV SANDI: I thought you said that there was no one assaulted or attacked
because of belonging to AZAPO.

MR ENGELANI: After my attack I use to hear that there were people who
were attacked.

ADV SANDI: Lastly, Mr Engelani, are you receiving any medical treatment?

MR ENGELANI: Yes, I am.

ADV SANDI: What is that treatment for?

MR ENGELANI: I am being treated for me left leg and I was also injured in
my head and I am using pills, Fineton pills.

ADV SANDI: Using these pills for your head injuries?

MR ENGELANI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Who is your doctor?

MR ENGELANI: Is it Dr Akwilla here in Cecilia Makiwane Hospital.

ADV SANDI: Is there any other medical treatment you receive except the
one you have just mentioned?

MR ENGELANI: No.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Engelani. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Engelani, we thank you for coming before the Commission
to give us your story. We will try and investigate this matter and get
some clarity on certain issues which are not clear now. If we want more
information from you our Investigating Unit will visit you to get more
information, but for now you may go back to your seat. We thank you.

MR ENGELANI: Thank you Sir.

	------------------------------

