Untitled


EMBARGOED UNTIL

18 MARCH 1997, 2:00 P.M.











SUBMISSION TO THE TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


CONCERNING THE RELEVANCE OF ECONOMIC, SOCIAL,


AND CULTURAL RIGHTS


TO THE COMMISSION'S MANDATE




18 MARCH 1997













Submitted By:

Community Law Centre (UWC)

Development Action Group

Legal Resources Centre

Black Sash

Centre for Human Rights (University of Pretoria)

NGO National Coalition

National Land Committee

National Literacy Cooperative

Peoples' Dialogue

Urban Sector Network

SUBMISSION TO THE TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


CONCERNING THE RELEVANCE OF ECONOMIC, SOCIAL,


AND CULTURAL RIGHTS


TO THE COMMISSION'S MANDATE




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


This submission is being made by the Community Law Centre (UWC), the
Development Action Group, the Legal Resources Centre, Black Sash, the
Centre for Human Rights (University of Pretoria), the NGO National
Coalition, the National Land Committee, the National Literacy
Cooperative, the Peoples' Dialogue, and the Urban Sector Network. We make
this submission based on the conviction that an analysis of violations of
economic, social, and cultural rights under apartheid is crucial for
ensuring the implementation and protection of the rights entrenched in
our new Constitution. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission ("TRC") is
clearly obligated, as set forth in its enabling legislation, to provide
that analysis. While it has the discretion to look at a broad range of
issues, the TRC cannot ignore violations of economic, social, and
cultural rights (e.g. violations that arose out of the enforcement of the
pass laws, forced removals, and bantu education) and still fulfill its
mandate under the law. Its obligation to look at such violations is clear
from the following provisions of its enabling legislation:

1) the definition of "gross violations of human rights," which states
that the TRC is to examine violations of all human rights that are the
result of acts of killing, abduction, torture, or severe ill treatment --
thus the use of violence to enforce the pass laws, or the killing or
torture of a community activist resisting a forced removal, is a
violation of economic and social rights that falls within the mandate of
the TRC;

2) the definition of "victim," which includes an individual who has
suffered a "substantial impairment" of any of his or her human rights as
a result of a gross violation of human rights;

3) the requirement that the TRC establish "as complete a picture as
possible of the causes, nature, and extent of gross violations of human
rights;" and

4) the requirement that the TRC provide "recommendations of measures to
prevent" violations of all human rights.

This submission also draws upon South African constitutional law and
international human rights law to show how some violations of economic,
social, and cultural rights constitute in and of themselves severe ill
treatment, and thus are violations that the TRC must acknowledge.

This submission includes specific examples of the type of analysis the
TRC should undertake to fulfill its obligations, and show how fulfilling
this obligation is possible given the TRC's resources. The TRC should
analyse violations of the right to access to housing, freedom of
movement, choice of residence, education, health, access to resources,
and welfare and social security -- all rights that are part of our new
Bill of Rights. A historical analysis of the State's deliberate violation
of these rights based on race and gender is crucial to the creation of a
human rights culture.

Finally, this submission makes the following eight specific
recommendations to the TRC:

1. Make explicit in its analysis the connection between acts of killing,
abduction, torture, and severe ill treatment and violations of economic,
social, and cultural rights.

2. Show through illustrative examples how violations of economic, social,
and cultural rights were an important cause of gross violations of human
rights.

3. Emphasize in its final report the Constitutional imperative of
respecting and implementing economic, social, and cultural rights.

4. Provide concrete recommendations, based on its historical analysis, to
governmental and non-governmental human rights bodies concerning the
protection of all the rights recognized in the Bill of Rights, including
economic, social, and cultural rights.

5. Elicit and highlight the connection between gross violations of human
rights and violations of economic, social, and cultural rights in its
public hearings.

6. Solicit submissions from relevant government ministries,
organizations, corporations, and associations concerning the violation of
economic, social, and cultural rights under apartheid.

7. Call upon perpetrators of violations of economic, social, and cultural
rights to acknowledge their responsibility for past violations, support
programs of restitution and reparation, and contribute to the fulfilment
and protection of all human rights.

8. Note in its final report that there are individuals and communities
that are victims of human rights abuses that are not victims of gross
violations of human rights, and emphasize the State's responsibility to
recognize and assist such victims.

We are embarking on a new chapter of human rights in this country. The
Bill of Rights provides a vision of society that we have chosen to build
for us and our children. A full range of economic, social, and cultural
rights are for the first time constitutionally protected. In playing an
important role in our historic transition, the TRC must emphasize the
importance of economic, social, and cultural rights in creating a human
rights culture that will ensure that we never revert back to the evils of
the past. Indeed, as this submission shows, the TRC is obligated by law
to do so. SUBMISSION TO THE TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


CONCERNING THE RELEVANCE OF ECONOMIC, SOCIAL,


AND CULTURAL RIGHTS


TO THE COMMISSION'S MANDATE


The organisations making this submission have a history and track-record
in the promotion and protection of human rights in South Africa. We
recognise that all human rights - civil, political, economic, social and
cultural - are interrelated and interdependent. Consequently, we believe
that human rights should be treated in an integrated and holistic manner
by all institutions involved in their protection. Our approach is that of
the new South Africa. The recently enacted Constitution, which was
supported by the vast majority of political parties, adopts a holistic
view of human rights, recognizing economic, social, cultural, civil, and
political rights. Like the new South Africa, the African region and the
international community also take a holistic view of human rights.

The purpose of this submission is to explain why the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission is obligated by its enabling statute to examine
certain violations of economic, social and cultural rights, and to
suggest ways that the Commission can fulfill that obligation.

Examining certain violations of economic, social, and cultural rights
will not appreciably increase the workload of the Commission. Much of the
information required is already available to the Commission. For example,
the submission on education from the National Literacy Cooperation, on
gender from the University of the Witwatersrand, and the anticipated
submissions from the medical and journalistic professions include useful
information and analysis on violations of economic, social, and cultural
rights relevant to the Commission's mandate.

The Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act (hereinafter
referred to as the "TRC Act") clearly requires that the Commission
investigate and examine certain violations of economic, social and
cultural rights. The Commission's obligation is clear from the following
sections of the Act:

Section 1(ix), which defines gross violations of human rights as "the
violation of human rights through the killing, abduction, torture, or
severe ill-treatment of any person and any attempt ... to commit such an
act" (emphasis added). Thus the main focus of the Commission is on the
violation of all human rights, including economic, social, and cultural
rights, that were effected through the actual or attempted killing,
abduction, torture, or severe ill-treatment;

Section 1(xix) which defines a victim as a person or group of persons who
"suffered harm in the form of .... a substantial impairment of human
rights --- (i) as a result of a gross violation of human rights" or as a
result of an amnestied act, and those who suffered a substantial
impairment of their human rights as a result of intervening to assist
other victims. Thus the definition of victim complements the definition
of gross violation of human rights, indicating that violations of other
human rights, including economic, social, and cultural rights, that were
the result of an act of killing, abduction, torture, or severe ill
treatment, or that were the result of an act for which someone has
received amnesty, or that were the result of an effort to assist victims
of such acts, are directly within the mandate of the Commission's work.

Section 3(1)(a), which sets forth as one of the major objectives of the
Commission the establishment of "as complete a picture as possible of the
causes, nature, and extent of the gross violations of human rights,"
including "the antecedents, circumstances, factors, and context of such
violations." Recognition of the economic, social and cultural policies of
apartheid which led to gross violations of human rights is essential to
any discussion of the causes, antecedents, circumstances, factors, and
context of such violations. The nature and extent of gross violations
include their immediate impact on economic, social and cultural rights;
and

Section 3(1)(d), which provides that the Commission is to compile a
report of its activities and findings, including "recommendations of
measures to prevent the future violations of human rights." Thus the
Commission must provide recommendations for preventing violations of all
human rights, and not just gross violations of human rights. As
recognized in the Constitution, the African Charter of Human and Peoples'
Rights, the International Bill of Rights, and most of the recent major
international human rights treaties, human rights include economic
social, and cultural rights.

It is clearly not intended that the Commission examine each and every
violation of human rights -- or for that matter each and every violation
that qualifies as a gross violation of human rights -- that occurred
during the relevant period of inquiry, and we do not here suggest
otherwise. The Commission is obligated, however, to focus on violations
of "human rights" brought about through the specific acts of killing,
abduction, torture and severe ill-treatment. The Commission is obligated
to make recommendations for reparations to persons who suffered a
"substantial impairment of human rights" through a gross violation of
human rights or amnestied act, or as a result of attempting to assist
such individuals. The Commission is obligated to investigate and report
on the economic, social, and cultural context that led to gross
violations of human rights. The Commission is obligated to make
recommendations to the President concerning the protection of all human
rights, and not just those that qualify as gross violations of human
rights. The Commission has already shown that it recognizes these
obligations, by, for example, soliciting submissions from the media on
their role under apartheid, thus emphasizing the importance of both
freedom of expression and the regulatory functions of the media in
understanding and curtailing violations of human rights.

In this submission, we discuss briefly the three areas where it is clear
the Commission is obligated to take notice of violations of economic,
social, and cultural rights; provide some brief examples of the types of
economic, social, and cultural rights that are implicated by certain
gross violations; and suggest ways that the Commission can fulfill its
obligation to look at all violations of human rights.

In the first section, we show how the definition of gross violations of
human rights includes certain violations of economic, social, and
cultural rights. In the second section, we show how certain violations of
economic, social, and cultural rights constitute severe ill treatment. In
the third section we show how violations of economic, social, and
cultural rights are part of the causes, nature, and extent of gross
violations of human rights. In the fourth section we show how an
examination of economic, social, and cultural rights is crucial for
national efforts to prevent future gross violations of human rights. In
the fifth section we provide some brief examples to show the relevance of
violations of economic, social, and cultural rights to the work of the
Commission. Finally, in the sixth section we show how taking into account
violations of economic, social, and cultural rights will not appreciably
increase the workload of the Commission.

With this submission, we do not purport to be providing the Commission
with an exhaustive discussion of the legal and other arguments we raise,
nor with an exhaustive list of the implications of our conclusions, nor
with an exhaustive list of the ways the Commission can fulfill its
obligations. These and other issues have either already been sufficiently
discussed in other submissions to the Commission, or we anticipate will
be discussed in future submissions.

I. The Substantive Focus of the Commission and the Definition of Gross
Violations of Human Rights

One of the three core functions of the Commission's work is the inquiry
into "gross violations of human rights, including violations which were
part of a systematic pattern of abuse." It is clear that the Commission
is to focus primarily on those violations of human rights that involved
killing, abduction, torture, or severe ill treatment. Thus the Commission
is not obligated to undertake extensive inquiries into violations of
universally recognized civil and political rights, such as equality
before the law, privacy, freedom of expression, and the opportunity to
vote and otherwise participate in public life. Nor is the Commission
required to undertake extensive inquiries into violations of universally
recognized economic, social, and cultural rights, such as formation of
trade unions, protection of the family, and the enjoyment of a minimum
standard of living. The Commission is obviously not obligated to
investigate and analyse thoroughly all violations of these and other
rights. To impose such an obligation on the Commission would make it a
virtual certainty that its job would not be completed within its two year
life-span. By the terms of the TRC Act, however, the Commission may not
ignore the consequences of the violation of such rights in analysing the
causes and antecedents of gross violations of human rights, nor may it
ignore the effect of killings, abductions, torture, and severe ill
treatment on the enjoyment of those same rights. As the definition of
gross violations of human rights makes clear, the Commission is to focus
on violations of all types of human rights that resulted from acts of
killing, abduction, torture, and severe ill treatment. Thus an analysis
of the effect of a particular killing on an individual or group's right
to education or health care is clearly part of the Commission's mandate.

"Human rights" is not defined in the TRC Act, so the Commission must look
to other sources for a working definition. There are three sources for
the definition of human rights relevant to the Commission: 1) Chapter 2
of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa; 2) the African
Charter of Human and People's Rights; and 3) the International Bill of
Rights, consisting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights; the
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights; and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The first is the
authoritative statement of what constitutes human rights within the new
South African constitutional system; the second is the authoritative
statement of what constitutes human rights at the African regional level;
and the third is the authoritative statement of such rights at the
international level. Those rights include prohibitions against invasions
of a person's bodily integrity (i.e., torture, killing), economic,
social, and cultural rights, and civil and political rights. South Africa
has joined the rest of Africa and the international community in
recognizing that the full range of civil, political, economic, social,
and cultural rights are inter-related, and that the violation of any of
them affects the fulfilment of the others.

In its inquiries concerning gross violations of human rights, the
Commission is therefore obligated to examine violations of all human
rights that occurred as a result of killings, abductions, torture, and
severe ill treatment. Thus the killing of a student leader who was
advocating for better schools in his community has an effect on the right
to education guaranteed in the Constitution and under international law.
The loss of the student leader directly affects the ability of the rest
of the community to attain this universally recognized right. Those that
killed the student leader may have had as one of their motives the
enforcement of the "bantu education" policy. Thus the killing of the
student leader may violate any number of human rights, including the
prohibition against summary execution, the right to education, and the
right to freely associate, to name only three.

The Commission will soon be hearing testimony on the destruction of KTC,
and the desperate efforts of thousands of people to defend their right to
access to housing. The right to access to adequate housing is entrenched
in our new Constitution at Section 26. Furthermore, no one may be evicted
from their home or have their home demolished without an order of court
made after considering all the relevant circumstances, and no law may
permit arbitrary evictions. The residents of the satellite camps of
Crossroads and KTC were not only evicted without a court order, but their
homes were burnt and over 60 people were killed during attacks on their
homes. Thousands of people had their right to access to adequate housing
violated through killings and other severe ill treatment. One of the
causes of those killings was a deliberate government policy to deny
individuals the right to access to housing, freedom of movement, and
right of residence.

II. Some Violations of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Constitute
Severe Ill Treatment

One of the means of violating someone's human rights on which the
Commission is to focus is the "severe ill treatment" of a person. While
we suggest here that the concept of severe ill treatment should encompass
some violations of economic, social and cultural rights, it is clear that
the Commission's obligation to look at violations of economic, social,
and cultural rights is not dependent on such an interpretation of severe
ill treatment.

The Act provides little guidance on what is meant by severe ill
treatment. The Constitution prohibits "cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment," and one of the first decisions of the
Constitutional Court held that juvenile whipping constitutes cruel,
inhuman, or degrading punishment. At the international level, human
rights treaties have language similar to that found in our Constitution.
Interpretations of these phrases by international tribunals and jurists
provide useful guidance in interpreting severe ill treatment.
International tribunals and jurists have found the following to
constitute cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment:

(a) Forcing detainees to stand for long periods of time; subjecting
detainees to sights and sounds that have the effect or intent of breaking
down their resistance and will; or inflicting severe mental or physical
stress on detainees in order to obtain information or confession.

(b) Expulsion from, or refusal of admission to, one's own country
according to a discriminatory application of law; or in order
intentionally to inflict physical or mental suffering; or without the
necessary due process.

(c) Deprivation of certain basic needs of the person, such as the need
for food, water, or sleep, if the pain or suffering inflicted is not
severe enough to constitute torture.

(d) Deliberate indifference to a detainee's medical needs and deprivation
of the basic elements of adequate medical treatment.

(e) Sexual abuse and other forms of gender-based violence.

(f) Prolonged judicial proceedings and delay in capital cases.

(g) Delay in removing a condemned prisoner from a "death cell" after stay
of execution has been granted.
===========================================================================


The Violence of Forced Removals

A BAD [Bantu Education Dept.] man gave me a stand which had four poles at
the corners and said that was where I could build my house. I was given a
tent to erect on the stand. As soon as we had put a roof on the first
hut, the tents were taken away for someone else.
A water tanker was parked nearby so that we could get water to make the
mud walls of our house. The moment the tents were taken away, the tanker
was also taken elsewhere. After the tanker went, we had to carry water in
5-gallon drums from the Tugela which was a mile downhill from our place.
This we still do.
There were no latrines. It was horrible to have to squat in public. The
stands were clear and there were many of them and everybody had to do
that. There was nowhere else to go that was private. We came from homes
where the nearest neighbour was half a mile away and there were thick
bushes to give us privacy. Now we were all living right on top of each
other.

Statement of a woman whose family was moved from a white farm to
Sahlumbe. Quoted from Surplus People Project, The Surplus People: Forced
Removals in South Africa 345 (1985).

===========================================================================

Based on the interpretation of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment by
numerous international tribunals and jurists, we argue that the
deliberate impoverishment of an individual brought about through the use
of force amounts to severe ill treatment. Thus, a family that was
forcibly moved to a location with no running water, inadequate or no
latrines, minimal if any medical care, and substandard or no housing,
suffered severe ill treatment. Although we believe that the vast majority
of black South Africans who live in poverty, and the vast majority of
women who are deliberately denied access to basic opportunities and
societal resources, are victims of severe ill treatment, it is not
necessary for the Commission to accept that view in order to find that
certain extreme and deliberate acts constitute severe ill treatment.

The deliberate application of force by the government that directly
results in a lowering of living standards, and that is undertaken with
wanton disregard for the well-being of the individuals effected, must
constitute severe ill treatment. Deliberate government policy that
affirmatively denies, on the basis of race, gender, or class access to
basic societal resources, and that deliberately provides unequal amounts
and quality of such goods based on race or gender, constitutes severe ill
treatment. As with all of the types of violations examined by the
Commission, this does not mean that each and every forced removal needs
to be thoroughly examined. It does mean, as we suggest below, that the
Commission is obligated to examine some examples of such violations, and
to include a discussion of the extent of such violations in its final
report.

III. Causes, Nature, and Extent of Gross Violations

The Commission is to compile "as complete a picture as possible of the
causes, nature and extent of the gross violations of human rights,"
including "the antecedents, circumstances, factors, and context of such
violations." Such a picture would be incomplete without the inclusion of
violations of economic, social, and cultural rights as a cause of gross
violations of human rights. In addition, the nature and extent of the
gross violations include the violation of a large number of economic,
social, and cultural rights, in addition to civil and political rights.
Finally, the violation of economic, social and cultural rights are
certainly an antecedent to, and constitute some of the circumstances,
factors, and context of, such gross violations.

The systematic violation of all human rights - political, civil,
economic, social and cultural - in South Africa under apartheid created
the context which resulted in gross violations of human rights. Through
systematic policies and legislation the government deprived black people
in this country of their right to vote, the right to freedom of speech
and assembly, and basic labour rights. It also deprived the majority of
its citizens of their fundamental right to live where they please, work,
and receive education and social security without discrimination on the
grounds of race or gender. Large numbers of people were subjected to
discriminatory and arbitrary forced evictions, demolitions and
resettlements in accordance with the dictates of apartheid ideologues and
planners.
===========================================================================


The Violation of Economic and Social Rights through Violence

This thing came so sudden upon us that I cannot tell you what happened,
this thing came so sudden upon us, yes. We did not know that we are
coming here, we did not know where we are going to ...Yes, they did tell
us but it took so long before they came to us. When they came to us they
stalked us. They stalked us because they did not say to us which day or
which day. When they came to us, they came with guns and police and with
all sorts of things they came to us. And then we see that we are here.
Then we had no choice, the guns were behind us. They did not say
anything, they just threw our belongings in and they broke off as they
went. There is nothing to say or the gun is through your head. If I just
talk, the gun is through my head. Soldiers and everything were there.
What can we say now, we are not used to these things. Then we have to get
in, what can we do. They shoot us dead, then we have to get in, what can
we do. No they did not say anything, they just said get in, so that we
are here today. We did not know, we still do not know this place...And
when we came here, they dumped our things, just dumped our things so that
we are still here. What can we do now, we can do nothing. We can do
nothing. What can we do?
Woman moved from Tsitsikama reserve to Elukhanyweni in 1977-78. Quoted in
Surplus People Project, The Surplus People: Forced Removals in South
Africa 128 (1985).

I saw docile squatters ... dragged by their clothing and beaten with
batons and sticks during the second raid on Crossroads...in less than six
hours. Passes were grabbed by the police and other officials and thrown
to the ground or temporarily confiscated. Ten policemen were injured when
they were stoned in an earlier raid....A squatter had been shot dead and
soon a baby was to die on his mother's back as they were trampled by
panic-stricken squatters attempting to escape yet another teargas
attack...
Report in Rand Daily Mail, 15 September 1978. Quoted in Surplus People
Project, The Surplus People: Forced Removals in South Africa 148 (1985).



===========================================================================

To enforce such deliberately inhumane policies, the State resorted to
killings, abductions, torture, and severe ill treatment. Thus the
violation of these economic, social, and cultural rights was one of the
causes that led to the more immediate violations that are the main focus
of the Commission's work. Resistance to these oppressive laws and
policies -- through demonstrations, political organizing, and other forms
of protest -- provoked in turn further gross violations. In addition, the
nature and extent of the violations of economic, social, and cultural
rights sometimes amounted to gross violations of human rights. Thus, to
use an earlier example, the killing of the student leader not only
violated that individual's right to life, but also a range of other
rights of that individual and the community from which she came. The
submission on gender prepared by Dr. Sheila Meintjes and Beth Goldblatt
from the University of the Witwatersrand provides a number of examples of
the range of human rights violations that resulted from an act of
killing, abduction, torture, or severe ill treatment.

IV. Prevention of Human Rights Violations

Finally, the Commission must analyse the full range of the types of
violations that occurred during the past in order to make useful
recommendations to the President concerning the prevention of violations
of all human rights. An understanding of violations of economic, social,
and cultural rights under apartheid is crucial for understanding the
causes, nature, and extent of gross violations of human rights, and thus
crucial to developing recommendations for preventing future human rights
violations.

The TRC Act clearly contemplates that the Commission will consider all
human rights in formulating its recommendations. As noted above, the
South African definition of human rights embodied in the new Constitution
-- which was supported by all sectors of the political and legal
establishment -- embraces economic, social, and cultural rights. South
Africa, by integrating civil, political, economic, social, and cultural
rights in its own Bill of Rights, recognizes the importance of all of
these rights to the creation of a just and democratic society.

The human rights bodies established under the new Constitution include in
their mandate all human rights -- including economic, social, and
cultural rights. Thus, the Human Rights Commission is specifically
empowered to promote respect for and protection of all human rights. The
Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural,
Religious, and Linguistic Communities is to promote the human rights of
specific communities. The Commission for Gender Equality is empowered to
look at violations specifically affecting women. Statutory bodies have
also been created to focus on specific areas of economic and social
rights, such as the Land Claims Commission. In directing that the
Commission look at all human rights, the Parliament envisioned that the
Commission would provide an analytical background plus concrete and
useful recommendations to the existing human rights bodies for the
protection of all human rights. These new Constitutional and statutory
bodies do not have jurisdiction to investigate abuses that occurred prior
to 1994. It is the Commission, therefore, which is to provide the
historical analysis for formulating policy to move our society forward to
a just and democratic government. An analysis of past violations of all
human rights is thus crucial in formulating meaningful recommendations to
these bodies.

V. Relevance of Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights to the Commission's
Work: Some Brief Examples

We present here brief illustrations of how economic, social, and cultural
rights can be integrated into the Commission's work. It is by no means an
exhaustive list, but we offer it to provide what we hope are useful
examples of how the Commission can fulfill its obligations under the TRC
Act.

Education -- The right to a minimum level of education and the obligation
of the state to make further education progressively available and
accessible is entrenched in the Constitution and is echoed in the African
Charter on Human and People's Rights, and the International Bill of
Rights. The violation of the right to education is part of the cause of
many gross violations of human rights. Violations of the right to
education also contributed to the increased resistance of the population
to the state, resulting in additional incidents of gross violations. The
submission from the National Literacy Cooperation and others sets forth
both the violation of the right to education under apartheid (an
important component of the context of gross violations of human rights),
and also provides examples of violations of the right to education
through killings, abduction, torture, and severe ill treatment. That
submission also provides information on how the denial of the right to
education led to other human rights abuses, including gross violations of
human rights.

The struggle of South Africans to attain minimal standards of education
resulted in gross violations of human rights. The massacre of innocent
school children peaceably marching in Soweto in 1976 is a well-known
example of a gross violation of human rights involving education rights.
The killing, torture, abduction, or severe ill treatment of a child
affects that child's access to education.

The legacy of deliberately inferior education for a vast majority of our
country's citizens based on race and gender has vast implications for the
future of South Africa and the protection of human rights. It is thus
crucial that the Commission note where applicable the extent that gross
violations were caused by such inferior education, and give some sense of
the extent such gross violations contributed to the failure to provide
everyone with the education to which they are entitled.

Housing, Residence, and Freedom of Movement -- The right to access to
adequate housing, to reside anywhere in the country, and to freely move
throughout the country, is explicitly protected in the Constitution, and
in the International Bill of Rights.

Violations of the right to access to housing, and freedom of movement and
residence, include the policy of forced removals. It is estimated that
from 1960 to 1983, 3.5 million people were forcibly relocated. In
implementing this policy, and in responding to resistance to it, numerous
people were killed, tortured, abducted and severely ill treated. In
addition, the implementation of the policy itself, as argued above, in
many cases constituted severe ill treatment. Forced removals also led to
the destabilization of numerous communities, creating individuals with
little or no stake in their communities, and creating a greater
willingness to resort to violence.

Forced removals, especially of the elderly, infirm, and disabled, may
give rise to severe ill treatment. Documented cases of individuals who
died immediately before or after a forced removal because of the
government's wanton disregard of their health and well-being undoubtedly
constitute severe ill treatment. The deliberate and forced removal to a
place with no clean water, no sanitation, and inadequate or no housing
constitutes severe ill treatment. The Commission does not have to agree
that people who live in severe poverty with inadequate facilities -- as
many did and still continue to do -- are victims of severe ill treatment
in order to find that a specific government act that forced an individual
into such a situation amounts to severe ill treatment. We submit that
government action that takes a group of people who were living in one
place and forcibly removes them to a different location, constitutes
severe ill treatment as defined in the TRC Act.

Examples of the violation of the right to access to housing and the right
to freedom of movement and residence through forced removals that
involved gross violations of human rights include:

1. The fate of the Mogopa community.

2. The destruction of the Crossroads satellite camps and KTC, which
resulted in over sixty deaths. (See brief description above at pages
12-13.)

3. The removal of people to Sahlumbe and Onverwacht. The residents of
Sahlumbe were given tents and instructed to build their own houses. There
were no latrines, and water was obtained from the distant Tugela river.
The settlement of Onverwacht consisted of 100,000 people in 1981. There
was only one medical clinic, one police station, one supermarket, and
nineteen schools that served approximately 20,000 students.

4. The forced removal of the Bakubung people. Some were arrested and
tortured as a direct result of their resistance. Thus violations of the
Bakubung people's right to housing, freedom of movement and residence
were implemented through the use of killing, abduction and torture.

5. The destruction of Langa, including the detention of community leaders
as well as those who resisted removal, similarly constitutes a gross
violation of human rights involving the right to access to adequate
housing.

6. The killing of Saul Mkhize in Driefontein, as part of the resistance
to forced removal of this "black spot." Mr. Mkhize was killed because of
his leadership role in the resistance to the forced removal. In other
words, it was his advocacy for the right to access to adequate housing
and freedom of choice of residence for his community that resulted in his
killing.

7. Similar violations can be found in the treatment of the people of the
following communities: Mfengu, Moutse, Braklaagte, Leeufontein, District
Six, Pageview, and Fordsburg.

These are examples not only of gross violations themselves, but also of
crucial parts of the antecedents, causes and context of a wide range of
gross violations that occurred during the relevant period. By focusing on
some of these violations, and by underscoring the connection between them
and the right to housing, the Commission will assist us in understanding
the violations of the past and better prepare us for preventing such
violations in the future.

Health Care -- The right to adequate health care is entrenched in the
Constitution, the African Charter, and the International Bill of Rights.
The most obvious examples of the violation of this right concern the lack
of medical attention provided to those in the government's custody. The
deliberate failure to provide medical attention to those who had been
tortured or severely ill-treated illustrates the intersection between the
right to adequate health care and gross violations of human rights. The
case of Steve Biko is only one prominent example of many such
occurrences. The death of doctors, such as Neil Aggett and Fabian
Ribeiro, raise issues regarding the right to health similar to those that
the killing of the student leader raised for the right to education. The
deliberate refusal of an ambulance legally reserved for white people to
stop and provide medical attention to a black patient constitutes severe
ill-treatment. We realize that the medical profession is in the process
of preparing a submission to the Commission on its role during the
apartheid years, so we direct the attention of the Commission to that
submission for a more thorough discussion of the types of issues raised
by the acts and omissions of that profession.

Welfare and Social Security. Apartheid created massive inequalities
between people based on race and gender. Patterns of violence under
apartheid that constitute gross violations of human rights contributed to
these inequalities, and these inequalities, in turn, comprise part of the
causes of and antecedents to gross violations of human rights. While we
do not discuss here the complicated dynamic between poverty,
discrimination, and violence, we would refer the Commission to other
submissions it has already received, and note some recent statistics
compiled by the government. In August 1996, the Lund Committee on Child
and Family Support noted that South Africa is characterized by extremes
of wealth and of inequality, that 95% of the poor in South Africa are
African, and that many of the poorest households are those headed by
women. The report also noted that an estimated 2.3 million South Africans
do not receive a basic level of nutrition, including 87% of all African
children under the age of 12. While a thorough analysis of the causes and
effects of such inequalities is beyond the scope of the Commission's
mandate, the causal effect of such inequalities on incidents of gross
violations of human rights, and the perpetuation of such inequalities
through killings, abductions, torture, and severe ill treatment, clearly
are part of the Commission's mandate.         

Allocation of Services. The distribution of resources under apartheid
deliberately denied basic services to individuals based on race and
gender. The deliberate denial of basic services in some cases certainly
constitutes severe ill treatment, especially where it is clear that the
denial was not caused by limited resources or technology, but was based
on a deliberate policy of discrimination. The perpetrators of such
violations include the numerous statutory bodies specifically empowered
to provide such basic goods and services to the country. For example,

1. Water. The Minister of Water Affairs was specifically empowered to
distribute water from a government waterworks to any person for any
purpose approved by the Minister. Notwithstanding this, water was
distributed in such a manner that the vast majority of white group areas
had houses serviced by running water while the majority in other areas
often had no running water and had to walk miles for access to water.

2. Electricity. Legislation provided for the provision of electricity
throughout the country. Eskom was empowered "to investigate new or
additional facilities for the supply of electricity within any area ...
so as to stimulate the provision, wherever required, of a cheap and
abundant supply of electricity. Local authorities were licensed to
provide electricity, and were obligated to "supply electricity within the
area of supply mentioned in his license to every applicant who is in a
position to make satisfactory arrangements for payment therefor." This
mandate was carried out in a deliberate fashion so that powerlines ran
over but not into many townships, while citizens in white areas enjoyed
the benefits of those same powerlines.

3. Planning. Government policy and planning under apartheid was
specifically designed to foster "separate development," which in effect
meant the diversion of most of societies resources to the white
population, and mostly to the white male population. Such planning
included structural inequalities based on race and gender in access to
and distribution of property; the brutal dislocation and forced removal
of entire communities; grossly unequal access to economic opportunities
and services based on race and gender; and gross disparities in access to
residential, recreational, and community facilities. The deliberate
allocation of burdens and benefits under apartheid -- through, for
example, taxation; access to land, property, and other economic
resources; and provision of municipal services -- were implemented
through specific acts of gross violations of human rights, and are an
important part of the cause of such violations.


A similar inquiry to the three outlined above can be undertaken with
respect to a variety of government policies. For example, government
policy regarding the denial of post and telecommunication services, and
the effect that such denial had on the provision of health care and other
basic rights, is another area where incidents of severe ill treatment can
probably be found.

In addition to being directly responsible for acts that constitute severe
ill treatment, many of the parastatals also developed quasi-private
security forces that were directly involved in acts of killing,
abduction, torture, and severe ill treatment. Thus in many cases the
basic rights to water, health care, and a minimal level of subsistence
were violated through such acts.

VI. Impact of Including Violations of Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights on the Commission's Work

The inclusion of violations of economic, social, and cultural rights as
set forth above will not appreciably increase the current workload of the
Commission. As mentioned above, much of the information needed for such
an analysis has already been submitted to the Commission, or is in the
process of being submitted to the Commission. The inclusion of such
violations will also not have an appreciable affect on the number of
individuals who qualify as victims under the TRC Act, since as noted
above victims include those who suffered a "substantial impairment of
human rights" through a gross violation of human rights, or through an
act for which amnesty has been granted. Many individuals who were denied
adequate housing suffered a violation of their human rights. Those
individuals will qualify for reparations under the terms of the TRC Act
only if they can establish that the means by which they were made a
victim included an act of killing, abduction, torture, or severe
ill-treatment, or was the result of an act for which someone has been
granted amnesty.

VII. Conclusion

The Commission has achieved much in its first year of existence. The
information it has elicited concerning killings, tortures, and other
violent acts in our past has contributed greatly to our understanding of
the suffering that occurred under apartheid. The purpose of this
submission is to emphasize the Commission's obligation to provide us with
an understanding of why these violations occurred, and to help us to
understand their occurrence within a political, economic, social, and
cultural context. The vast majority of black people in this country still
live under abject conditions that were deliberately created under
apartheid. South Africa enjoys the unenviable distinction of having one
of the worst disparities in the world in distribution of income, wealth,
and resources based on race and gender. Conditions that fuelled
resistance and subsequent reactions from the state led to many of the
gross violations of human rights the Commission is examining. It is our
view that until the personal and social consequences of the
socio-economic discrimination and deprivation inflicted on black people
in this country is properly acknowledged, the ultimate objectives of
national unity and reconciliation will not be achieved. This does not
mean that the Commission must provide a thorough analysis of all the
violations of human rights that occurred in our past. It does mean,
however, that the Commission must provide an analytical framework for us
as a society to ensure the creation of a durable human rights culture
that protects all our rights. The socio-economic legacy of apartheid is a
daily reality for millions of people in South Africa struggling to obtain
access to adequate housing, health care, education, food, water and
social security. It is by and for those millions that the new South
Africa has been formed. We owe to all South Africans, and to the legacy
of past suffering and the reality of the suffering that continues, a
clear statement of the devastating consequences of keeping the vast
majority of our population in such abject conditions.

It is clear that the Commission is obligated under the Act to examine
violations of economic, social, and cultural rights, and that focusing on
such violations will enhance the usefulness and relevance of the
Commission's work, its final report, and its final recommendations. It is
also clear that the Commission has neither the time nor the resources to
undertake a thorough and systematic investigation and analysis of all of
the violations of human rights that occurred under apartheid. We do not
here argue that it should. We do argue, however, that the Commission
cannot escape its obligations as clearly articulated in the TRC Act. The
Commission should, therefore, at least do the following:

1. In its analysis of gross violations of human rights, make the
connection between such acts and all of the violations that resulted.
Thus, to use an example, the analysis of the killing of a student leader
should include references to the right to education and how its violation
contributed to the killing, and how the killing resulted in further
violations of that right.

2. In its analysis of the past, show how the violation of economic,
social, and cultural rights was a direct cause of gross violations of
human rights. This can be done by focusing on one or two illustrative
examples of each type of violation. Thus the final report should include
one or two case studies of the inter-relationship of gross violations of
human rights and the right to housing, education, health care, etc.

3. In its final report, note the Constitutional imperative of respecting
and implementing economic, social and cultural rights in the new South
Africa, and impress upon the government the importance of legislative and
other measures, including appropriate reparations, to ensure the
protection and fulfilment of these rights.

4. In its final recommendations concerning the protection of human rights
in South Africa, draw upon our history of human rights violations to
formulate meaningful recommendations to the various constitutional and
statutory human rights bodies concerning the protection of all human
rights recognized in our Constitution. This would include organizations
involved in education, housing, and social security. We know that the
Commission is already consulting with those bodies, and urge that such
consultations continue for the purpose of formulating realistic and
meaningful recommendations to such bodies.

5. In public hearings on gross violations of human rights, elicit the
connection between the incidents of killing, abduction, torture, or
severe ill treatment and economic, social and cultural rights (as well as
civil and political rights) to create a holistic picture of the abuses of
the past.

6. Solicit submissions from relevant ministries, organizations and
associations concerning the violation of economic, social, and cultural
rights. Such organizations might include the parastatals, such as Eskom,
Telkom, and Transnet (for and on behalf of the former South African
Railways and Harbors). Since many of these organizations have publicly
committed themselves to the new Constitution and its Bill of Rights, they
should be approached to submit information either to the Commission or
another suitable body on their past violations of human rights and their
current plans to remedy such past violations. This falls squarely within
the Commission's mandate to further reconciliation between perpetrators
and victims, and between citizen and state.

7. Call upon the perpetrators of violations of economic, social, and
cultural rights (a) to admit publicly their role in and responsibility
for these violations, (b) to pledge publicly that neither they nor their
organizations will commit such violations in the future, and (c) to
commit publicly to contributing to a program of reparations (including
increased provision of relevant services) to victims of their past
violations.

8. Note that there are individuals who are victims of human rights
violations but who are not victims of gross violations of human rights,
and that it is incumbent upon the state to recognize and assist such
individuals by means other than reparations as set forth in the TRC Act.

The overall purpose of the TRC during this transition period has been
clear from the start: to provide an authoritative base for not only
understanding what violations occurred, but to begin to understand why
they occurred, and to make initial recommendations aimed at preventing
their future occurrence. An examination of the violation of economic,
social and cultural rights during the relevant period is thus a crucial
part of the Commission's task.

We have emphasized the Commission's clear obligation under the TRC Act to
examine certain violations of economic, social, and cultural rights, and
to offer a few suggestions of how, given its current resources and
activities, the Commission can fulfill that obligation. The Commission
has already received a number of submissions that expand upon many of the
issues we raise here, and will undoubtedly through its own solicitations
and through the activities of other organizations, be receiving
additional information that will expand upon what we have only briefly
touched on here. We only make this submission to underscore the
importance to the Commission's work of looking at violations of all human
rights as required by its enabling legislation. We would, of course, be
willing to discuss the issues raised in this memo with interested
Commissioners and staff, and remain eager to assist, given our own
limited resources, the Commission in fulfilling its important mandate.



