	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	03-10-1996	NAME:	FREDDIE J. MULAUDZI

CASE: VENDA

DAY 1



MR ALLY:	Thank you for being so patient, you've been waiting quite a
while. You're coming to speak to us about your son, the death of your son.

	Before you do, I'm going to ask if you will just please take the oath
with Commissioner Richard Lyster.

FREDDIE JOSHUA MULAUDZI:	(sworn states)

MR MANTHATA:	 ... and you see this happening through this police coming
before the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

MR MULAUDZI:	The question is not clear.

MR MANTHATA:	You say that kind of a process happening through those
police coming, appearing before the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

MR MULAUDZI:	I think that would be okay.

MR MANTHATA:	Mr Mulaudzi, thank you.

MR LYSTER:	You're, I think the fourth person today who's mentioned
Sergeant Mambele Tshivhase. Was he, is it correct that he was attached to
the Security Branch at Sivase police station?

MR MULAUDZI:	Yes, he was a member of the Security Branch, Security Branch.

MR ALLY:	Sergeant which is a fairly low rank in the police, what - have
you any idea where he took instructions from? Was he acting on his own,
was he acting under instructions from the SAP in Louis Trichardt, do you
know what the chain

VENDA HEARING						TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	FJ MULAUDZI

of command was, who is his superiors and to you know

anything about them?

MR MULAUDZI:	That person referring to whether he is Sergeant or not, it
was difficult for us to identify him because he was wearing plain
clothes. His link with other police which could either give him
instructions is a question which I ... 	(tape ends)

MR LYSTER:	Do you know anything about an interrogation centre, known as
Vembe?

MR MULAUDZI:	Yes, I do. That interrogation centre is at Sebatsa, it is in
the First National Bank robot, taking the direction to Njelele. There is
a first turn off after Sebatsa Spurs, which led to the former White areas.

	The first building there, where there is bushes, there is a small gate,
to such an extent that you can't even think that there is a building
there. That is the place called Vembe Interrogation Centre.

MR LYSTER:	Interrogated while sitting on a cold, wet floor. Is that where
Sergeant Tshivhase beat you on the back with a sjambok?

MR MULAUDZI:	Yes.

MR LYSTER:	Do you know if Sergeant Tshivhase is still in the police force?

MR MULAUDZI:	At present I don't know.

MY LYSTER:	Thank you very much.

MR ALLY:	Thank you once again, Joshua Mulaudzi for coming forward and
also for assisting us to get some idea of what was happening in former
Venda land during the ...

	--------------------

