
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	27-06-1996	NAME:	NICHOLAS L. GANGCA		

CASE: PORT ELIZABETH

DAY 2



ACTING CHAIRMAN:	Nicholas Lulamile Gangca. We would like to thank you for
your presence here and we hope that you will take this opportunity and
give us details about what happened. As we always do, I would request
Reverend Xundu so that you can take an oath before you can give evidence.
REV XUNDU:	Thank you sir and we welcome you. I would like you to stand up
so that you can take an oath.

NICHOLAS LULAMILE GANGCA:	(sworn states)

REV XUNDU:	Thank you. You can take a seat.

ACTING CHAIRMAN:	Over to you Ms Tiny Maya.

MS MAYA:	Mr Gangca, we have a statement here - you are going to give
evidence about Monde Gangca, who was injured and was fatally injured, it
was in 1985.

	Could you please give us brief information and a short background about
him, the organisations to which he belonged and anything that you can
think of about him?

MR GANGCA:	Monde Gangca was a member of the United Democratic Front, he
was also a boxer, he used to attend or perform here at Centenary Hall. He
would always go for training. I was always selling liquor so he would
assist me at times.

	So this particular day he requested me to release him so that he doesn't
help me with the sales that I was doing, so that he can go for training.
He did go, I knew that he would come together here at Centenary Hall. I
think it was

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	NL GANGCA

at four, between four and five, it was in summer, so it was still not yet
sunset.

	Somebody called me out and said I must come and look because Monde was
being attacked by the AZAPO. I went to the spot, when I came there, I was
informed that he was taken to hospital. I went to the police station to
give a statement, they asked me with whom am I staying. I stated that I
was staying with my mother and Monde himself.

	My wife was at the church at the time. They told me to go to their
mortuary. I saw him and I could identify him. I was very angry because he
was hacked. There was a gashing wound on the head.

	I wanted to confirm and make sure so I opened it because I wanted to see
the extent of the injuries. He was hacked on the chest, the ribs were
also chopped. I also took - I went back home and took my axe and I wanted
to challenge those who had attacked my brother.

	In the mean time I was expected to go to the police station again after
a day or two, I was prepared to revenge the death of my brother. The
police wanted to arrest me because they said I must not take the law into
my hands.

	I waited for quite a long time, but nothing happened. Whilst I was
staying, I learnt information that they were threatening to attack me
also - these members of AZAPO.

	I was informed by some of my friends that they were looking into the
matter and they were going to attack me.

MS MAYA:	Can you go back. You said somebody came to inform you about your
brother's injuries?

MR GANGCA:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Do you know anything about a person who might have witnessed the
killing?

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	NL GANGCA

MR GANGCA:	When I got there, I made enquiries to the people who were
nearby. Most of the people said they were afraid so the only person who
was left behind, was my neighbour, Mabasho. He is the person who closed
his eyes.

MS MAYA:	Is the person who closed his eyes, the one who found him dead?

MR GANGCA:	No, he just saw the fight and then he went there and then when
he saw that he is my brother, he closed his eyes because he was just
starring. He assisted him to go to hospital.

MS MAYA:	How could the people from the AZAPO organisation be identified?

MR GANGCA:	Most of the people knew them.

MS MAYA:	How many were they and how old were they?

MR GANGCA:	It was said it was a mixture of both old and young.

MS MAYA:	You said he wanted to collect his friends who was going with him
for training. Where were these friends?

MR GANGCA:	I was informed that all of them were hacked because it was a
funeral of four people when they were buried.

MS MAYA:	Are there any people who can mention?

MR GANGCA:	No, at the time it was very difficult to ask the people,
because even if I wanted to know who were the people who were responsible
for his death, nobody gave me the information because they were scared.

	They agreed and admitted that they had seen the people and the knew them
but they didn't give me the information.

MS MAYA:		In other words there was nobody that was arrested?

MR GANGCA:	No, because the police said I must wait they

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	NL GANGCA

will make enquiries and investigations and find out what happened.

MS MAYA:	Was there any investigation?

MR GANGCA:	No, I don't remember.

MS MAYA:	In other words you have never been called to appear in court?

MR GANGCA:	No, because I went to lay a charge, because they said I must
wait, I will hear from them, I waited until the day of the burial and
nothing happened.

MS MAYA:	Did he have his own family, the wife or children?

MR GANGCA:	No, he didn't.

MS MAYA:	As you came here, what would you like the Commission to do for
you?

MR GANGCA:	There are so many of them. You know there were two of us, my
mother was an old age pensioner. This brother of mine used to work and
then he would assist me with the contribution in maintenance.

	I am not working, I believed that my brother would have been assisting
me. As he was training he was trying to be a professional boxer, probably
I would also be benefitting. 	Maybe I could have also be having a car, be
in possession of a car by now due to my brother's performances.

MS MAYA:	You can continue Mr Gangca. Is there anything that you would
like to say? You can continue.

MR GANGCA:		No, I've got only one thing. The Commission can use its own
discretion and see what it could do. We called him Maqcina. If Maqcina
was still alive, that is why I say, I wouldn't be eating bread only, I
would be well-to-do, probably. I also want those people to be arrested.

MS MAYA:	I'd like you to repeat what you've just said.

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	NL GANGCA

MR GANGCA:	I want the attackers to be brought to book. If I say I would
like to be assisted myself, I don't refer to myself only. I would also
like the other people who were responsible for his death to be arrested.

	I am also afraid to go and beg to other people, because I don't know who
is the next person to hack me to death, probably I would also be attacked
because they had already threatened to do that.

	The Commission can use its discretion. My electricity has been cut off
because I am unemployed, I am unable to meet all the requirements, I am
certain that my younger brother could have been supporting me, we would
be working together cooperatively to maintain the family.

MS MAYA:	We thank you very much Mr Gangca about your story. Is that all
that you would like to say?

MR GANGCA:	Yes, Ma'am, I am through.

MS MAYA:	I will hand you over to others, maybe my colleagues would like
to have some questions.

ACTING CHAIRMAN:	Mr Xundu?

REV XUNDU:	I would like to ask one question. Who was the leader of the
AZAPO at that time?

MR GANGCA:	The leader of the AZAPO as we always knew or heard, it was
said it was Maqina. I cannot hide that information, because that is what
I know.

ACTING CHAIRMAN:	Thank you Lulamile, we share your pain because you have
lost your brother, Monde. You are still very young and was ambitious.

	We are certain he was ambitious because he was one of the professional
boxers or one of the champions in this Eastern Province.

	We have heard what you have said, the Commission will

PORT ELIZABETH HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	NL GANGCA

take it into consideration. We are also grateful that you have for this
opportunity because we are certain that you have been bottling this for
quite a long time.

	You might be grateful that you at last got the opportunity to say this
in public, thank you very much.

	--------------------



