
	1	N GAVU

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: NOMANGESI SYLVIA GAVU

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We are going to call our next witness. The next one is
Nomangesi Sylvia Gavu. Ms Maya is going to lead you Nomangesi.

NOMANGESI SYLVIA GAVU: (sworn states)

MS MAYA: Thank you very much Mr Chairperson. I greet you Nomangesi.
According to your statement you are going to talk about your brother,
Mzwabantu Gavu, who was also shot on this particular day.

	We noticed that you said as a family at home you heard the gunshots
outside. You went out to see what was happening, is that correct?

MS GAVU: Yes, that is correct.

MS MAYA: When you went out what was is that you saw?

MS GAVU: I went down the Maduna Street. There were people lying next to
Station 16. The police didn't allow us to get closer to see what was
happening. We were next to the hall. The ambulances were there and they
were transporting people.

MS MAYA: When did you discover that your brother was also injured?

MS GAVU: On that particular day, the others who went with

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	N GAVU

him came back, but he never came back. My other sister by the name of
Nomsola went with that particular car to search for the people who did
not come back.

MS MAYA: How old was Gugulethu?

MS GAVU: He was 18 years old.

MS MAYA: Was he attending school?

MS GAVU: No, he was not at school.

MS MAYA: When you found him in that mortuary in Port Elizabeth, what
happened to you, were you also called to the Jubilee Hotel?

MS GAVU: Yes, my mother went to the Jubilee hotel.

MS MAYA: Was there any money that you received on that particular day?

MS GAVU: Yes, my mother received an amount of money which was about R9
000.

MS MAYA: Is there anything that you would like to add concerning this
matter?

MS GAVU: Yes, there is something else that I would like to say.

MS MAYA: Can you go on.

MS GAVU: As a family at home, what affected us most is the fact that
during his burial, this actually affected my mother mostly because on
that particular day, we last saw him on that day when the people were
marching going to the grave yard, we never got a chance to see him while
the families of people were being shown to the bodies.

MS MAYA: Is there any requests that you would like to tell us?

MS GAVU: Yes, as victims who were killed because of our brother being the
residents of Langa, I request that the Commission must do something which
is going to be a

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	N GAVU

memorial. Something that if we look at it, this is going to remind us of
the victims who were killed. For instance we don't have proper
facilities, things like halls and fields, soccer fields or whatever,
sports ground.

MS MAYA: You said something about your mother's health. how is your
mother's health?

MS GAVU: Since after that, my mother is not well. She is suffering from a
stroke. I am here on behalf of my mother now.

MS MAYA: Is there any treatment, or medication that your mother is
getting?

MS GAVU: Yes, she is getting treatment from the hospital.

MS MAYA: Thank you, I am going to hand over to the commissioner, maybe he
has got some questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

-------------------



