CONTENTS





Gender and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission



A submission to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission



Prepared by Beth Goldblatt and Shiela Meintjes

May 1996

Dr Shiela Meintjes
Department of Political Studies
University of the Witwatersrand
Private Bag 3
Wits
2050
Tel: 011-716-3339
Fax: 011-403-7482 Beth Goldblatt
Gender Research Project
Centre for Applied Legal Studies
University of the Witwatersrand
Private Bag 3
Wits
2050
Tel: 011-403-6918
Fax: 011-403-2341


===========================================================================


CONTENTS


A. INTRODUCTION

B. WHY GENDER?

C. AN HISTORICAL ANALYSIS OF WOMEN'S EXPERIENCE OF REPRESSION, RESISTANCE
AND TORTURE


* THE 1960s

* THE 1970s

* THE 1980s


D. HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS - A GENDER PERSPECTIVE
* I. UNDERSTANDING GENDER AND POLITICAL VIOLENCE
  * 1. WOMEN AS DIRECT AND INDIRECT VICTIMS OF APARTHEID
  * 2. CONSTRUCTIONS OF GENDER IN PRISON: THE WAYS IN WHICH WOMEN
    EXPERIENCED TORTURE
  * 3. THE IMPACT OF RACE AND CLASS ON WOMEN'S EXPERIENCE OF
    POLITICAL VIOLENCE
  * 4. WOMEN AS PERPETRATORS

* II. SITES OF POLITICAL VIOLENCE
  * 1. GENDER AND TOWNSHIP VIOLENCE
  * 2. VIOLENCE IN KWA-ZULU/NATAL
  * 3. HOSTEL/THIRD FORCE VIOLENCE
  * 4. VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN NEIGHBOURING STATES
  * 5. GENDERED VIOLENCE IN THE LIBERATION MOVEMENTS


E. AMNESTY AND GENDER

F. REPARATIONS AND GENDER

G. PROPOSED MECHANISMS TO ACCOMMODATE GENDER IN THE TRC PROCESS

H. CONCLUSION

I. APPENDIX: INTERVIEW INFORMANTS

J. BIBLIOGRAPHY


===========================================================================

GENDER AND THE TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

A submission to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission prepared by:

Beth Goldblatt and Sheila Meintjes



May 1996

A. INTRODUCTION

The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) will play an extremely
significant role in shaping South Africa's collective understanding of
our painful past. It will also have to deal with the individual victims,
survivors and perpetrators who come before it and will have to consider
important matters relating to reparation and rehabilitation. All South
Africans will in one way or another be touched by the truth and
reconciliation process. We will argue that by viewing our past through a
gendered lens we gain a deeper understanding of how our particular
history has shaped the lives of all South Africans.

A gendered approach requires that we look at the way society locates
women and men in relation to all areas of their lives, such as the
workplace, the domestic sphere and the civic life of the community. In
South Africa, race, class and gender have together, but in different
ways, structured social relationships. In this conceptualisation, women's
experience cannot be understood in isolation from men's, but as a
consequence of the interrelationship of women and men's roles and
statuses in society generally. In the past and the present women have
been and are subordinated to men. This constrains the full development of
men as well as women. To transform this imbalance will require measures
directed at restructuring all social relationships in all spheres of
society.

It is with this understanding that we may be better able to construct a
new society based on a human rights culture which allows all people,
women and men, to contribute fully to society and develop to their full
human potential.

This submission was initiated at a workshop held on the 19th March, 1996
at the University of the Witwatersrand. The workshop, entitled "Gender
and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission" was called by the Centre for
Applied Legal Studies to further develop a process of thought about the
gender issues facing the Commission. A number of psychologists, lawyers,
members of Non-Governmental Organisations, members of the Gauteng
Legislature and representatives of the Commission were present. The
workshop, while simply a collection of interested people, included
representatives from each of the four regions of the TRC. The
participants felt that the issues raised in the workshop should be placed
before the TRC in a formal submission. We hope that this submission will
be of assistance to the Commission in fulfilling its important role.

This submission is intended only as a starting point to aid the
Commission in understanding how gender forms part of the truth and
reconciliation process. We have explored some of the issues that need to
be looked at further and we certainly do not believe that this is the
final word on any aspect covered in the submission. We have drawn upon
comparative literature in an endeavour to provide a framework within
which to understand how gender has affected women's experience during the
three decades that form the review period of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. We have drawn upon the work of people who have written about
their own or other people's experiences of human rights abuses. We have
also interviewed a number of women whose experience we believed would be
useful in helping us to draw out possible trends during the three decades
which are the concern of the TRC. This framework will need to be further
developed and refined as more evidence of this gendered experience
becomes available in the course of the Commission's hearings.

The interviews we conducted were in-depth, where our informants gave of
their time and spoke openly and frankly about their experiences. We wish
to acknowledge the assistance given by all of these remarkable women
whose insights provide the major substance of this submission.

We have focused on the experience of women alone and have not explored
how gender structured the male experience of our past. We acknowledge
that by not exploring how men's experience was gendered, we are omitting
an important aspect of a gender analysis of our past. We have only looked
at women's experience because we believe that it is women's voices that
are most often ignored. Failure to approach the experience of human
rights abuses through a gendered lens will lead to the neglect of women's
experience of abuse and torture, for these are often seen as a male
preserve. We have already seen women in TRC hearings emphasise men's
experiences of violence rather than their own. This distorts the reality
which was that women too were direct victims of past abuses. While a
gender analysis involves examining men and women's differing experiences
we have chosen to focus on women's experiences lest they be omitted. We
would urge that further studies be undertaken to explore male gender
constructions in the experiences of our past.

We do not intend to suggest that men were not also subjected to torture,
nor, as the evidence which will be presented here will show, that men,
like women, were not also subjected to sexual torture. Men and women
experienced sexual torture: electric shocks to genitals, and to women's
breasts were commonplace. Both men and women were brutally beaten;
slammed against floors and walls; flung around on beams; deprived of
sleep; forced to stand or to sit on imaginary chairs for hours;
teargassed; held in solitary confinement for months on end and forced to
endure days of endless interrogation and even killed. But the nature of
these experiences, even the sexual aspects, were felt differently.
Assaults on pregnant women, which led to miscarriage, body searches,
vaginal examinations, were all assaults on the sexuality and sexual
identity of women. Our intention is to show that gender was a key aspect
in the power relations which pertained in detention and in prisons in
South Africa. We wish to show that there was a keen awareness by the
police of the nature of gender power relations, and how this could be
used to threaten and engender fear in their victims. Tactics used against
women changed considerably during the period under review, as we will
show.

The submission begins by examining the reasons for developing a gender
analysis of political violence. We then outline our historical analysis
of women's role in resistance and their experience of repression and
torture from the 1960s to the present. We then examine the three areas of
the TRC's work ie: human rights violations, amnesty and reparations and
rehabilitation. Within our examination of human rights violations we
explore the gendered experiences of victims in a range of situations of
political violence. Finally, we suggest that the findings of this report
have certain practical implications for the TRC and we make certain
proposals in this regard.

B. WHY GENDER ?

Gender refers to the social construction of masculinity and femininity,
not to the sexual differences between men and women. The purpose of
emphasising gender relationships is to highlight the particular manner in
which women have been subordinated and oppressed through socially
constructed differences. Indeed, gender differences have meant that South
African men and women have often experienced our history in different
ways. In South Africa, as in most societies in the world, women have been
accorded identities which cast them in particular social roles which have
restricted their civil and political status. Intersecting with gender are
also race, class and other identities, such as ethnic and religious
allegiances. These form the basis of the 'public-private' divide, which
has given to men the role of civil and political representative of the
household, to the exclusion of women.

Patriarchy refers to the social, political and economic system which
provides men with unequal power and authority in relation to women in
society. Patriarchy existed in pre-colonial societies, and interacted
with colonialism to create specific forms of gender subordination in
South Africa. Interlaced with the racial and class development of our
country, patriarchy has wound its bonds around South African women. As
with other forms of social and political control, dominance of women has
often been enforced by violence. While apartheid defined blacks as
secondary political and civil subjects, women were given an even further
diminished social and legal status through both the customary and the
common law and other social mechanisms. It is this social imbalance which
has enabled men to devalue women and which can be linked to the
prevalence of abusive and oppressive treatment of women and girls in our
society.

Thus, within the exclusions of customary law, for instance, women were
given a secondary status as minors, excluding women from rights of
guardianship over children and the right to own property, amongst other
things. The common law excluded white women from guardianship and various
economic rights so that they, too, were treated as secondary citizens.
Although specific advances were made in the first half of the twentieth
century, for instance white women received the vote and were given
property rights, it was not until the introduction of the equality clause
in the new Constitution that all women in South Africa were given formal
recognition as equal citizens. However, social norms have not advanced in
line with the Constitution and women still find themselves politically
and economically disadvantaged and remain the victims of violence and
discrimination. Women-headed households are significantly poorer in all
race groups. Women make up a disproportional section of the unemployed
and are amongst the lowest paid in most industries. Incidents of rape and
domestic violence are extremely high in South Africa. Women make up
almost a third of the Parliament but a recent study has shown that their
effective participation is much lower.

Our key concern in this paper is to show how gender is an integral
component of social analysis. This will provide a fuller understanding of
our past and will also enable the TRC to carefully consider the manner in
which it conducts its functions. This will impact on the way in which we
shape gender relations in our society in the future.

C. AN HISTORICAL ANALYSIS OF WOMEN'S EXPERIENCE OF REPRESSION, RESISTANCE
AND TORTURE

The history and development of South Africa since colonial rule is the
history of conquest and the institutionalising of racial discrimination
and subordination. Less emphasised, but equally important, has been the
way in which patriarchal power relations were integrated and used to
bolster the power of the oppressors within indigenous communities.
Patriarchy, that system of power and authority wielded by men throughout
history, was embedded within the social fabric of apartheid in particular
ways and meant that women and men from different racial, class and
cultural backgrounds experienced life very differently. In this section
we do not attempt a comparative analysis of the experience of women and
men in a systematic manner. Rather we are concerned here to emphasise
women's experience of the system where we believe it to have especially
violated their rights during the last three decades. Some of these
excesses were experienced equally by men but as we have explained, we
have chosen to highlight women in this paper.

This section explains how women's experience of apartheid repression
changed during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s as the nature and scale of
organised popular opposition grew. The early 1960s saw the end of open,
constitutional opposition and the espousal of armed struggle. The end of
the decade witnessed the emergence of a new black consciousness movement
driven by a generation of intellectuals educated within apartheid's Bantu
education system. This included numbers of women journalists, teachers,
and doctors, amongst others. In the 1970s, an independent trade union
movement grew from massive strikes in 1973, which included large sectors
dominated by women workers. The 1976 Soweto riots drew school children
into the growing mass opposition to apartheid. A tidal wave of young
people, women as well as men, left the country for the camps of the
country's guerilla armies based in exile. By the 1980s, international
condemnation of apartheid coincided with the emergence of a broad front
of internally organised opponents of the apartheid regime. Amongst them
were independent regional women's organisations, whose objectives
embraced national liberation together with the eradication of gender
discrimination.

The 1960s.

Apartheid, as with earlier forms of domination and control, was founded
on and reinforced by violence. The period from 1960, the era which forms
the starting point for the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, has been
described by Deborah Posel, as the second phase of apartheid, a period
which entrenched the notion of 'Separate Development'. During this period
women found themselves in a less secure position than men in relation to
opportunities for employment, in relation to security of tenure or access
to housing. Influx control limited women's mobility more than men's.
Forced removals constituted one element of the fulfilment of apartheid,
another was the creation of 'ethnic homelands', which provided the
context for the development of a collaborative bureaucratic elite,
surrogates of the apartheid state. This was a period which had
devastating consequences upon the lives of black people. Whole
communities were uprooted from land which many of them owned and were
dumped in inhospitable environments without adequate infrastructure.

Families were torn apart and impoverished as migrant labour regulations
prevented women from joining working husbands in the towns. Women were
left in rural areas dependent upon remittances from their migrant
husbands. Rural women were prevented from seeking work independently in
the urban areas, or from joining their husbands. Single sex hostels in
these areas made it impossible for rural wives and husbands to maintain
family life. Children often lived with grandparents and seldom saw their
parents. Women in urban areas, with permanent rights of settlement, were
prevented from obtaining housing on their own account. Single women,
heads of families, and widows were the subject of considerable abuse by
both the state and by members of their own extended families. Many a
widow was forced out of her home within weeks of her husband's death
because of the law, to spend the rest of her life as an exploited
'tenant' in someone else's backyard. Often she was simply "endorsed out"
to a rural settlement. Her basic human rights to security and freedom of
movement, to freedom from want, were violated by apartheid law.

The 1960s were a period of intense repression, following the vitality of
protest movements to the pass laws and to the introduction of Bantu
Education and apartheid. The period benefitted from a global economic
resurgence. At the same time, influx control was a major focus of
government policy. Endorsements out of urban areas became widespread -
between January 1959 and March 1962, 7 280 women and 18 931 men were
returned to the homelands from the Cape Peninsular alone, an area where
the Coloured Labour Preference policy was rigidly enforced. The African
National Congress and the Pan African Congress were both banned after the
Sharpeville massacre in March 1960, events which significantly altered
the scale of public opposition to state controls. Eight women, ten
children and fifty one men were killed at Sharpeville. A state of
emergency was declared during which more than 10 000 people were detained.

It seems clear that methods of interrogation changed after the State of
Emergency. Mass arrests had given people a chance to consolidate their
collective identity into a community of opposition. The state developed
strategies aimed at undermining the possibilities for coherent and
collective action. In particular, more sophisticated and psychological
methods of interrogation were developed. With the introduction of new
measures in 1963 which allowed for 90 days detention without trial, a
new, more sinister era opened for detainees. In 1965, this was increased
to 180 days detention. The Terrorism Act of 1967 entrenched the powers of
the state for purposes of deterring all internal opposition.

Techniques of mental torture developed during the 1960s as the Security
Branch learned about assaulting the mind during periods of extended
isolation in detention. The experience of black and white people was very
different. The police were not shy to use brute force against black
women. Hilda Bernstein has described the experience of beating, house
burning, destruction of possessions endured by the women of Zeerust, for
instance, in their struggle against the pass laws and the Bantu
Authorities in the 1950s.

Albertina Sisulu spent years restricted by banning orders and house
arrest in her home in Orlando. She was held in solitary confinement on
several occasions, in 1963 for three months and again in 1981 and in
1985. In 1963 both she and her young son Zwelakhe were detained under the
Suppression of Communism Act in order for the Security Branch (SB) to try
and find the whereabouts of Walter Sisulu, who was in hiding. She
described the mental torture by her captors, who would taunt her with
lies about the severe illness and subsequent death of her youngest child.
But for Albertina Sisulu, personal concerns were not an issue, and
although she was clear about the centrality of her role as wife and
mother, her struggle against the repression and oppression of the state
and its legislative apparatus was always a 'national' struggle, and her
own will subject to the collective will of the nation.

It is not clear why a prominent person like Albertina Sisulu was not
assaulted at any time during her frequent detentions and continuous
police harassment. Other women were not so fortunate. Rita Ndzanga had
been an active trade unionist during the 1950s, and she and her husband
were members of South African Congress of Trade Unions. In December 1969
she and her husband were detained under the Suppression of Communism Act,
their children left for months without parents. She recounted her
experience in detention:

They dragged me to another room, hitting me with their open hands all the
time...they ordered me to take off my shoes and stand on three bricks. I
refused to stand on the bricks. One of the white Security Police climbed
on a chair and pulled me by my hair, dropped me on the bricks. I fell
down and hit a gas pipe. The same man pulled me up by my hair again,
jerked me and I again fell on the metal gas pipe. They threw water on my
face. The man who pulled me by the hair had his hands full of my hair...I
managed to stand up and then they said: "on the bricks!'...and they hit
me again while I was on the bricks. I fell. They again poured water on me.

Neither the torture of detention, nor the death of her husband, Lawrence
Ndzanga, in detention in January 1977, deterred Rita Ndzanga's continued
involvement in the trade union movement, and in resistance to state
repression.

Ruth First has described her diabolical experience of personal
disintegration in her book 117 Days, where she felt so wretched about
giving in to write a statement that she tried to kill herself. More than
twenty years later, another member of the South African Communist Party,
Jenny Schreiner, also described her breaking point as when she agreed to
make a statement. Schreiner also tried to end her life. But Ruth First
was not assaulted as far as we can establish, nor were other white women
detainees of those early 1960s detentions. The exception was Stephanie
Kemp, who was the first white woman to be assaulted in detention in 1963.
This changed dramatically after the emergence of SASO in 1968 and during
the 1970s. And by the 1980s race was no longer a factor in brutality when
Ruth First was murdered by a parcel bomb sent by South African agents in
Mozambique.

Whilst white women may not have experienced the same levels of physical
abuse, they were subject to continual harassment in other ways. Helen
Joseph, for instance, was silenced and politically ham-strung by banning,
listing and house arrest. Indian women, too, experienced continuous
police harassment and intimidation. Amina Cachalia described to us the
way in which the police threatened her and her children, as well as her
husband, when they raided their home:

During the sixty's, as early as 1961, everything was in uproar. The ANC
and the PAC are the organisations (concerned), and soon after they
clamped down on house arrests and bannings... It had a more individual
effect on families and people...it was a psychological warfare...because
it really clamped down on us in that fashion.

It had a very detrimental effect on my children. We had decided at some
stage to send the children to boarding school because of the continuous
harassment by police. Security police came to the house on a daily basis,
at any time of the day and night. The kids were absolutely beside
themselves with fear that either their father or I would be taken
away...We thought if we sent the kids away to boarding school it might
save them that terrible life that they were going through with us.

During the 1960s the methods of banning organisations and individuals,
listing people whose activities were seen as a danger to the state, and
employing house arrest were all used to demobilise people and
organisational activity. Banishment was also frequently used. Frances
Baard, a trade unionist who had spent her working life in the Eastern
Cape was banished to Mabopane in the Transvaal. Here she was
linguistically foreign, without shelter, far from her home and family.
She describes her experience in moving terms:

They got this place in Pretoria for me...a little dirty place: it was a
two-roomed house. Not a house, a shack, and I was put in there. I had
nothing with me from jail - only the clothes I was wearing...There was no
blanket, nothing. It was very cold...I didn't even know a person in that
place, I couldn't even speak the language of the people there. Since I
was brought there by the S.B.(Security Branch) the people were afraid of
me, to talk to me...

Persecuted for refusing to take a pass, flung into a hostile environment,
Frances Baard, just released from prison, was penniless and jobless. At
home in Port Elizabeth, her house was appropriated, her furniture
removed. Her children were thrown into the street, one also arrested and
jailed for being without a pass. Political activity became personally
dangerous, and activists risked extended periods of detention and
harassment. This was the case for many people who had been part of
organisations now banned, like the ANC Women's League. By 1963 the
Federation of South African Women was effectively defunct as a result of
state action against its member organisations and individuals.

The 1960s ended, then, with a significant shift in methods of torturing
women. Solitary confinement in indefinite detention without trial was
combined with psychological and physical torture. Sleep deprivation,
standing for long periods and repeated assaults were among the methods
used. Further research needs to establish the numbers of women detained
during this period, and the conditions of their detention.

The 1970s

Black Consciousness (BC) emerged during the latter part of the 1960s as a
new political and ideological current, to become the strongest internal
influence on black politics until the resurgence of trade unionism after
1973. "BC stressed the need for blacks to reject liberal white tutelage,
the assertion of a black cultural identity, psychological liberation from
notions of inferiority, and the unity of all blacks including 'coloureds'
and 'Indians'", argued Jonathan Hyslop. Its origins lie in the South
African Student's Organisation (SASO) led by Steve Biko and others
including a number of women intellectuals. Its manifestation amongst the
youth in fostering confidence was particularly important. In addition,
and an aspect not brought out by Hyslop and others, was the significant
support given to the youth by adult women. This occurred not simply at
the individual level, though this was important, but took the form of
organisation. In 1975 the Black Women's Federation (BWF) had been formed
to bring black women together in a broad front to create opportunities
for themselves, and to reject Bantu Education. In 1976, in the wake of
the Soweto uprising, the Black Parents Association was formed.

Even initially, during the peaceful demonstrations, parents supported the
pupils. But what really thrust the parents into action was the brutal
police killings...Nobody expected the cold-blooded murder of young
children. So besides their solidarity with young people they were angered
- and their hatred and rejection of the whole system came to the surface.
They were completely with the students in their militancy.

Of further significance during the 1970s was the emergence of a
burgeoning trade union movement after widespread, and successful, strikes
in 1973 and 1974, beginning in Durban, and developing in the East Rand
and Eastern Cape. In few of the accounts of these developments does the
role and participation of women workers appear. Hilda Bernstein's short
history of women's experience of apartheid, provides little evidence for
women's involvement in trade union activity, nor the extent of their
persecution by both employers and the state. But Bernstein does show that
in all the arrests and detentions, women were amongst those rounded up,
detained and assaulted.

Methods of torture had by the 1970s assumed a much more violent form
against those in opposition. Detention and the process of interrogation
was one which involved the most callous and vicious forms of assault, and
did not exclude women on the basis of their sex. Thenjiwe Mtintso, a
former journalist, member of SASO and later a commander in Umkhonto we
Sizwe (MK), described her experience of detention and interrogation as
one of constant physical assault and abuse of her womanhood. Mtintso's
account of detention shows that in the early days of SASO, women were
initially treated by the Security Branch as if they were simply the
bed-fellows of the men. There was no perception that women might be equal
players in the struggle against the apartheid system. However, this view
changed as women proved to be stubborn subjects in detention. Women began
to experience similar physical assault to men, which included punches in
the face and all over the body. However, Mtintso also suggested that
women received a lot of severe blows, either from punches or from kicks,
in the area of the womb. She also describes how there were on occasions
threats of rape, though she was never in fact raped. However, the
assaults were brutal and continuous. For instance during her second
detention, in 1976, her head was repeatedly banged against a wall for a
whole day by successive members of the torture team. She says that
although she cannot prove the connection, the most searing headaches have
dogged her ever since.

Joyce Dipale, another Black Consciousness leader, had been kept in
solitary confinement during 1976 and 1977 for 500 days. Her graphic
description of being tortured by a method known as the 'horse' indicates
that by this time women were being subjected to similar brutal treatment
as their male colleagues. Hilda Bernstein wrote about Dipale's experience:

She was subject to many agonizing forms of torture, including the
'horse'- she was handcuffed to a pole and swung round and round until she
lost consciousness - electric shocks on her bare breasts, buttocks and
genitals ('I got used to the pain but never the humiliation'); beatings;
prolonged standing with deprivation of sleep, food and water; and being
kept in a dark room, she does not know for how long - 'I lost touch with
time'.

The combination of physical and sexual torture is evident from both
Dipale's and Mtintso's detention experience. Men also experienced torture
of their genitals and no doubt psychological attack on their masculinity
as well. But as we have indicated, our aim is to highlight women's
experience. During the 1970s, combined with ordinary forms of physical
torture, were also quite specific and systematic sexual forms of torture
which women found more difficult to cope with than simply being hit or
battered.

The sexual dimensions of gender power relations found expression also in
the experience of women within political movements. Men from all quarters
found it difficult to accept women's growing prominence in political
movements. For instance, after she went into exile, Mtintso describes
some of the difficulties she faced as a woman in maintaining discipline
amongst her comrades. Although she became a senior commander in MK, she
experienced forms of sexual harassment which she attributes to the
cultural norms within South African society. Men found it difficult to
take orders from a woman, and attempted to undermine her authority by
using sexual innuendo. Unlike others, she was in a strong enough position
to be able to effectively counter this with threats of her own.

The 1980s

During the 1980s, the context of resistance had profoundly changed.
International hostility had grown considerably, and in spite of British,
French and United States' reluctance to take a strong stand against
apartheid, an international boycott movement had got under way. Moreover,
internal organisation and opposition forces had grown in scale. The South
African regime was forced into cosmetic attempts to reform the worst
aspects of apartheid. In the context of a combination of reform and
repression, internal opposition movements became more strategically
organised, and a strong mass movement emerged. Alliances across race and
class barriers developed which threatened the cohesion of the apartheid
state. State repression became more violent, with the state increasingly
supporting reactionary forces within the homelands. The ANC and PAC began
to step up their guerilla attacks.

From the mid-1980s the struggle for competing control escalated into what
some analysts have termed a civil war. In conditions of war, civil war,
or in situations where people were involved in what they conceived to be
a political struggle for control over terrain or over resources - in
South Africa this was also constructed in ethnic terms, as in the
township struggles between hostel and town dwellers - militarised
constructions of masculinity and femininity became more pronounced, in
spite of counterveiling forces within MK, where it was well known that
women were soldiers and commanders. Women increasingly became drawn into
the violence which grew throughout South Africa, as activists themselves,
or as indirect victims. In the latter case, on all sides of the conflict,
women become ideological objects, as both desirable and thus to be
protected as nurturers, lovers and wives or to be captured to show the
other side's inefficacy in that role. The kidnapping of young women to
serve as sex slaves in the hostels is one example. So humiliation of
women was at times used to humiliate opponents.


Although these may have been the interpretations that men placed on the
role of women, women themselves put a quite different construction upon
their own actions. Even though women's role in resistance has often seen
them defined within their maternal function, women have used this as a
means of lifting themselves out of the private realm and entering the
public arena. This has had the effect of politicising private issues and
placing women's pain at the loss, abduction and attack on themselves and
their families on the oppositional agenda.

But while women were increasingly prominent in struggles against
apartheid, methods of sexual torture during the 1980s assumed greater
prominence in women's testimony. In our research there is evidence to
suggest that women's sexuality was used to undermine their identity and
integrity as human beings during their interrogations.

Elaine Mohammed gives graphic detail of the threat that sexual innuendo
played in her detention 1982. She was just twenty one, a University
student and a member of the Black Student's Society, when she was
detained for organising a meeting to commemorate the founding of the
South African Communist Party. She describes an ambience of sexual
terrorism imposed by the Security Police in their dealings with her. She
also felt extreme vulnerability when she began menstruating in detention:

A policeman came into my cell and said,"You're not allowed tampons in
here. You have to wear pads." And he shook the pad and hit it against the
wall saying, "Put it on." I found this incredibly threatening. The first
week I wasn't allowed to wash or have any change of clothing. After that
when they brought in my fresh underwear, they flung it around and said
how very small my panties were. I felt far more vulnerable with these
kinds of experiences than when I was actually threatened.

Some women had endured the most sadistic torture. Mohamed describes how
one woman she knew "-had rats pushed into her vagina as a means of
torturing her".

Rats would come into Mohamed's cell at night and eat the soiled pads.
This was linked in her mind with her friend's experience, and became an
enduring nightmare.

So I'd just pick up the bits of my pads, but that experience was terror
for me. I always felt that the rats were gnawing at me. But how could I
explain to someone that I found that more threatening than someone
hitting me? It's those kinds of experiences that I couldn't talk about
for a long time. Some of them I still can't talk about.

It was not only men who were involved in this strategy of attacking
detainees sexuality. Mohamed expresses her disappointment at the
participation of women police in these sexual tactics:

I felt very betrayed by what the women police did to me in prison,
because I expected more of women. I always liked my breasts because they
are very firm. The policewomen would flick them with their nails on my
nipples, saying, "It's a shame nobody wants you. You've obviously never
had a boyfriend. No one touched these breasts, else why are they so
firm?" I found this incredibly humiliating.

Men and women police were accomplices in degrading detainees sexually:

I was body-searched twice a day every day at the Fort, which was also
very humiliating. They made me stand astride and do star jumps to check
that I wasn't hiding anything in my vagina. I remember police-women
making me strip in front of men and people laughing at me...When they
didn't strip me, they'd feel through my clothes, slipping a hand into my
pants and bra. I found this much more traumatic than stripping...

Nor was it only the police who were involved in this system of sexual
harassment. Mohamed describes the behaviour of the District Surgeon who
visited the prison:

I remember lying on the bed with the prison doctor leaning over me and
putting his forearm between my legs to examine my throat. When I stood on
the scale to be weighed, he ran his hand over my behind and up between my
legs and told me to walk across the room undressed. I found this
traumatic because a doctor is someone I normally trust.

Lydia Kompe describes how the bantustan police were able to brazenly
terrorize and torture during the 1980s. They taunted her and used her
womanhood against her in their interrogation:

They came in numbers I'm sure there were about 20 well armed police and
in the same village there was a police station which was like a camp
where they were torturing people and we were taken to that torture
camp... The majority of us were woman and they even took Patsy's young
girl of about 15 years. A beautiful young girl which I was worried
about...They harassed me at that little office and I was very strong I
was very adamant and they got very angry with me. They questioned me
saying things like "you're such an old woman coming from an oppressive
country" because they saw themselves as a different country... "What do
you think your husband thinks about you? This is the reason why all the
men are getting divorced. You will sleep for the whole six months alone
because we're going to keep (you)." And I could hear the screams (of
people) being tortured that were kept in those tents but they would never
let me go and see what they were doing. It was worse than the central
government torture, so people say.

She described how electric shocks were administered during torture by
means of instruments powered by a generator specially brought to this
rural area for the purpose. She describes how the police later took them
to the police station. During the course of the night each young woman
was called in turn to leave the cell. On their return, the women would
not speak about what had happened to them but Kompe suspected that they
had been abused or raped. She explained the failure of the young women to
discuss these incidents in terms of the prevailing cultural view that
sexual abuse is shameful and cannot be divulged.

During the later part of the 1980s, during successive States of
Emergency, women were detained in large numbers. In the Fedtraw
publication A woman's place is in the struggle not behind bars a long
list of reported sexual assaults and torture on women are described. 12%
percent of the State of Emergency detainees in 1986/7 were women. This
amounted to 3050 women and girls. The violation of their identity and
integrity, their sense of themselves as women, would all have been part
of the form and content of their interrogation. In most cases, women will
find it very difficult to speak of these kinds of attacks upon their
identity in a public, let alone a private, forum. If any of them were
raped, as many were, it will be virtually impossible for them to suffer
the public humiliation that divulging such experience will entail.

What this brief history has tried to show is that during the three
decades during which women were the victims of apartheid, they
experienced repression in particular ways. Women's identities whether as
mothers, as wives or sexual partners, or as independent beings were
systematically abused. Women were abused by laws which blocked mobility,
or prevented their acquiring land or houses in their own right, or which
treated them as minors. Women were abused by societal norms which treated
them as sexual objects, empowering men to treat them without respect, and
to degrade their sexual integrity. These laws and norms legitimated the
sexual abuse of women by men, particularly those who found themselves in
positions of power and authority, such as the police. This meant that
women's experience of detention and torture was "gendered" both because
of how they were treated and because of their own subjective experience
of their treatment.

This development of repression against women is not only worth
understanding for historical purposes but affects the way in which the
TRC should conduct itself in all areas. With this history as a backdrop
we now look at how the TRC should address the question of gender
throughout its work.

D. HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS - A GENDER PERSPECTIVE

The Promotion of Truth and Reconciliation Act defines "Gross violation of
human rights" as comprising "the killing, abduction, torture or severe
ill-treatment of any person".

We submit that the words "severe ill-treatment" should be interpreted to
include a wide range of abuses which took place under apartheid.
Detention without trial itself is severe ill-treatment. Imprisonment for
treason against an unjust system is severe ill-treatment. Forced
removals, pass arrests, confiscation of land, breaking up of families and
even forcing people to undergo racially formulated education are all
forms of severe ill-treatment.

Whilst it is important to emphasise the killing and torture in our past
and the extraordinary suffering of opponents of apartheid, we need also
to pause and recognise that the apartheid system itself violated the
basic rights of human beings in ways that systematically destroyed their
capacity to survive. In addition, the gendered dimensions of this system
had an added dehumanising effect on many people's lives. The influx
control system, lynch-pin of the migrant labour system, not only
separated families, it also criminalised a huge number of men and women
who were merely trying to be together and to find work to support
themselves and their families. This experience often violated the
integrity of individuals in devastating ways.

Lydia Kompe, a former trade unionist and campaigner for rural women's
rights, and now a Member of Parliament, points to the multiple meanings
and subjective understandings of violence during the apartheid years. She
describes her experience of the system which gradually but systematically
undermined her identity and her way of life. She lost her rural home, was
forced to seek work in town as a domestic worker, where she could not
live with her husband nor bring up her children in a family. What she
describes is how the law, and its implementation and effects, were
different for men and women. While men's lives were hard under apartheid,
women suffered even greater economic burdens and social restrictions that
oppressed them and caused suffering. To spend time with her husband meant
risking arrest. He was twice arrested visiting her room in the suburbs
where she was a domestic worker. Of her experience she says:

Can one actually say it's violence... It's not as serious as my husband
being killed in jail. One would say, it's not like me having left my own
country going to stay thirty years outside. So that's what I always say
to myself, what is this violence? How can one express it to somebody who
can actually feel sympathetic? What I'm telling you now is a story. I
don't think it will be seen as violence. It's a story that this is how we
lived in the past. And this was where it actually crippled me in my mind.

The system which Lydia Kompe describes is one which forced her to adopt
illegality in order to survive and violated her sense of integrity. She
shows how the pass laws had a particular impact on African women. While
these laws also determined the movement of African men, they were even
more harsh in their effect on women. Because of the nature of gendered
social relations, women had primary responsibility for child care and
support and were disadvantaged in their access to the labour market:

It was an internal violence... I lived in a society for many years using
false identities for my survival because I was a victim of the influx
control... I had to do away with my own African culture, with my own self
and call myself a different thing so that I could come and work, because
I was not allowed to work in the so-called proclaimed areas of
Johannesburg, because I didn't qualify, I was a rural women. I had to use
false names and false identities... The surname Kompe is not my surname,
it is a false one... I respect that name because it made me bring up my
children and send them to school.

Her story is one of dispossession and impoverishment. Deprived of the
independence of small commodity production on the land, her family was
forced to uproot itself to seek wages in the urban areas:


(The) Betterment scheme, which is another apartheid law I will never
forgive and forget, because they made us what we are. We were so
independent. My father had a lot of cattle, lots of pigs, lots of
chickens... We never ate any bread unless my Mother grinded wheat to make
us home-made bread. Sweet potato is the food we grew from. My father was
exchanging sweet potato crops for livestock and all those things. That
system destroyed them and we saw ourselves, my parents, growing poorer
and poorer like somebody knowing he has cancer, one day he will die.
That's exactly what happened to us. I did my Standard eight, my parents
couldn't make it any more. They were forced to come to Johannesburg in
their old age to come and work. That's why I am what I am. I can't speak
English properly, I can't write English properly, I can't express myself
like I want to express myself to people.

For Lydia Komape, the move to the city required violating her rural and
African identity. She acquired a false identity as Lydia Kompe: "Komape
was a Bantu name, which would have prohibited me from entering the urban
areas". Yet she was tortured by the guilt associated with her new
identity as a coloured woman, which gave her advantages over her black
fellow-workers. She discovered that the coloured toilets were better than
those for African women. It was this which led her to begin organising on
the shop floor against the divisions imposed on workers by apartheid. She
concludes by saying that "The system crippled me and my mind. I was
committing a crime in order to survive, to avoid the crime of stealing".

Whilst this experience may not be a gross human rights violation in terms
of a narrow reading of the definition in the Promotion of Truth and
Reconciliation Act, in terms of the human suffering and psychological
trauma involved, the system as a whole was a gross violation of the human
rights of a whole society. Lydia Kompe's experience shows how not only
apartheid as a system shaped South African's lives, but how gender fed
into this experience and added to the burden suffered by black women.
While both men and women suffered from all of these methods of social
control, we have argued above that factoring gender into the apartheid
equation produces a more complete understanding of South African history.
In order to develop this understanding the TRC needs to locate itself
within a more expansive reading of the definition of "gross human rights
violations".

Some would argue that the Truth Commission is not the vehicle for
pronouncing on such rights violations. The Land Court is being used to
restore successful claimants to their improperly seized land. The Human
Rights Commission, Gender Commission, Constitutional Court and Public
Protector are fora for raising grievances and asking for relief. But will
any of these bodies look back into our past and acknowledge the suffering
that so many experienced ? One of the harshest legacies of apartheid is
the poverty it caused and the worst victims of this poverty are women.
Where do these women lodge their complaints ? The Truth Commission needs
to acknowledge all forms of past suffering in some way, even if its main
attention must remain focused on the most extreme cases of violent rights
abuses. The final report should locate the abuses within the context of
the apartheid system as a whole and wherever possible, this context
should be used to provide a backdrop for evidence that comes before the
Commission. The way in which the final report is used to educate and
inform future generations must be carefully considered. This could have a
profound impact on the development of equality and a culture of respect
for all people.

I. Understanding gender and political violence

1. Women as direct and indirect victims of Apartheid

The definition of victim in the Act also includes relatives or dependants
of victims. This is very important since it locates wives, mothers and
children in centre stage as having suffered "gross violations of human
rights". It is important to see these women as primary, not secondary
victims because they themselves suffered directly. It is indeed difficult
to separate the psychological pain of a mother whose child has been
tortured from the physical and psychological pain of the child itself.
Both are victims in need of support and rehabilitation.

This is supported in the law of delict which has developed both in South
Africa and elsewhere towards recognising that witnesses, relatives and
others who find themselves in a relationship of proximity to someone who
suffers direct harm are themselves able to claim pecuniary damages from
the perpetrator. This is an acknowledgment by our law that the person who
causes harm is liable to compensate the indirect victim who suffered
trauma and harm as a result of that person's negligent or intentional act.

Economic loss

A further dimension of loss is the economic or material one. In poor
families and communities, detention, imprisonment, exile and death in a
family might have meant the difference between starvation and survival.
Jesse Duarte emphasised this aspect when she spoke at a recent workshop
on 'Gender and the TRC':

Women who lost their sons or daughters for example, at the time when they
were just beginning to become economically active, have something to say
to us as a society about having reared a child to a particular point and
then that child is taken away from them without an explanation... Then
there is the cultural perspective of the economic position of that
particular family. It may be that that family did not need, or that
person did not contribute to the financial security of any family. But in
the minds of people right now they lost a potential breadwinner. It seems
to me that that issue has been sidelined because it has been raised
mainly by women. It also seems that women are (seen to be) raising it
because they want to be paid for the contribution that their children
made towards the struggle and that is not true. What is true is that
there was that reality - that your breadwinner was taken away from you.

Responsibility for maintaining family life rested very much upon women's
shoulders. This was the case for wives of political prisoners or
detainees. June Mlangeni's experience echoes that of many women as she
describes the impact of her husband's imprisonment:

We were young when Andrew was arrested and I was looking forward to the
future with him.. but it was torn apart by a government which separated
two people who aimed to build a future together. After I saw him on
Robben Island I became stronger, and I could cope better with the police
harassment. Before I used to shiver when the knock came at 2am knocking
from window to door, front and back doors ... and they knew that I was a
woman alone in the house...When Andrew was arrested I was a housewife ..
I started to work when Andrew was in prison and I took time off to go to
court to listen to Andrew's case .. then my employers found out that my
husband was one of the Rivonia Trialists, and I was fired.

Cultural loss

For women, the loss of a husband in struggle had a very significant
impact on her status in her community. Widowhood could mean the loss of
status. Again, Jesse Duarte pointed to this in her discussion, when she
explained the cultural position of widows in society:

It's not so much the economic loss there that is the issue. It's actually
the cultural loss and the loss of position within the community that
begins to impact on people. I think that a lot of times repression is
only understood to be the direct physical inflicted repression on a
person not the repression of years afterwards. When women lose their
husbands they become doubly repressed by your own community because you
are a woman without standing in the present context of the South African
cultural reality. Certainly in the eighties we had a number of reasons to
provide constructive support to women who became widows at that time
because they were almost illegitimized by the communities they came from.
These women had no more standing and the son became the women's husband
even if that woman was a very high-powered political activist. The minute
her spouse or her partner was taken away that was the end of her.

In her testimony to the TRC, Sepati Mlangeni, the widow of Bheki
Mlangeni, spoke of the awful effects of her untimely widowhood, a mere
two months after her marriage: "I am an outcast in my own society", she
said.

Effect on children and family life

A number of children were taken into custody and detention with their
mothers, whilst others were abandoned and left in the care of relatives
or even strangers for long periods. While the scope of this paper does
not extend to examining the experience of children, it is important to
remember that they were often also direct/indirect victims of human
rights violations. Young people disappeared from their homes, detained by
the police, who never informed their families where they were. Robert
Brand gave one chilling example of this kind already described to the
Commission:

Maudline Lutya's brother, Wiseman, disappeared during rioting in Guguletu
in 1976. She inquired at police stations and hospitals and asked around
the local community, to no avail. Nobody told her anything. Three weeks
later...she went to the Salt River mortuary...She found her brother "shot
through the head, some of his brains were coming out"

The Report on the Chilean National Commission on Truth and Reconciliation

examines the impact of the most serious human rights violations on
families and social relations. It talks of the break up of families, for
example: "in order to work I had to distribute my children. I was left
with no husband and no children." Other examples include: "The oldest
daughter took care of her brothers and sisters while her mother was
trying to locate her father" and "my father was the family breadwinner.
We were all little. We had to leave school and start working". Poverty
also impacted on people's experiences of human rights violations eg: "I
went looking for my 17 year old son everywhere. I did it all on foot
because I didn't have money to take the bus. I never found out anything
about him." This experience resonates with South Africa's systematic
control of people's mobility and the brutal and inhumane administration
of the apartheid system in general. It also mirrors our experience
regarding the impact of political violence and repression on family life.

Women's supportive role

Women's role in supporting their detained husbands and children began to
take on a political character. During the detentions of the 1980s a
support movement comprised of families and friends of detainees emerged,
the Detainees Parents Support Committee (DPSC). This movement constantly
brought to the attention of authorities and the public the harshness of
the deprivations caused by detention. It acted as a counter to the
attempts by the state to destroy political opposition. Indeed it
intensified it. Women, traditionally located in the private sphere, were
forced into the public sphere by the political struggles.

In another context, Jean Franco argues that the meetings at government
offices of mothers and families of the disappeared "constituted a space
of memory that also became a counter to the public sphere". The Mothers
of the Plaza de Mayo movement in Argentina and Families of the
Disappeared in Chile placed women in centre stage when other political
activity had ceased - they could "mediate between the state and the
individual". The women had been rejected by traditional society and thus
had nothing to lose by acting "abnormally" - "The adoption of a public
self in the face of ridicule". They physically moved from the private
into the public space - the Plaza de Mayo. The mothers "remade" reality
and restored individual meaning/proof of existence. Franco says "the
movement exploited the traditional view that mothers were the vessel of
reproduction, but they also went beyond any essentialist definition of
"mother" and thus demonstrated that it was possible to transform protest
into a broader ethical position, one based on life and survival".

Many of the people who have already spoken in the TRC are wives and
mothers of men who were killed. Many of these women were themselves
detained and harassed by the police. Although these women are coming
forward to speak about their husbands, fathers or sons, they should also
be encouraged to speak about their own experiences. In the first week of
the Truth Commission's hearings in the Eastern Cape, the widows of the
"Cradock Four", came to speak about their murdered husbands. They
themselves had been harassed and arrested, yet their stories were not
probed and were treated as incidental. Our society constantly diminishes
women's role and women themselves then see their experiences as
unimportant. The TRC should empower these women so that they are able to
locate themselves not just in the private realm as supporters of men but
in the public realm as resisters to oppression. There is nothing in the
Act which prevents these types of questions from being asked by
Commissioners.

Even Albertina Sisulu, one of the most prominent fighters for justice who
suffered a great deal of repression, was more able to talk about her
husband and children's experiences than her own. She uses the second
person to describe her experience because she finds it difficult to speak
about herself as a suffering individual. She also locates her
subjectivity within the collective - the nation.

The above discussion shows that women, even in acting in support of men,
must be seen as both victims and resisters in their own right. We must
however, also recognize that many women were directly active in
resistance and were detained, tortured and killed because of their own
effective opposition to the state.

2. Constructions of Gender in Prison: The way in which women experienced
torture

The history of torture and violence, explored above, highlighted the
varied forms of physical and psychological torture used against women.
Some of these were also used against men, but others targeted women's
femininity and sexuality and all were experienced in a gendered way. This
section explores some of the forms of torture developed to undermine
women.

Physical methods of torture

Accounts of women's experience in detention, recorded by the DPSC in
1987, include assault and electric shocks on pregnant women; inadequate
medical care leading to miscarriages; teargassing; solitary confinement;
body searches and vaginal examinations; rape and forced intercourse with
other prisoners; foreign objects including rats being pushed into women's
vaginas. Jessie Duarte and Nomvula Mokonyane speak of incidents were
women's fallopian tubes were flooded with water, sometimes resulting in
their inability to have children.

These forms of cruelty were not simply experienced by women but also by
children. During the States of Emergency girls as young as fourteen were
detained, tortured, beaten and teargassed.

Jean Franco discusses torture in Latin America in the 1960s and 1970s.
She argues that although pain has no gender, sexual difference shaped
people's experience of torture. Men were feminized, the torturers
revelled in their "masculinity" and women were the vehicle for sadistic
fantasies. She argues that social practices which construct gender
identity were recreated in an intensified form. Male bonding rituals
which reduce the other to the status of passive victim ie: casual rituals
of cruelty, were formalized and institutionalized in the death camps.
Male prisoners were forced to live as if they were women - for the first
time they came to understand what it meant to be constantly aware of
their bodies, to be ridiculed and battered.

Women were ashamed to speak of their torture. First person accounts are
often laconic or euphemistic. When recording their experiences for
commissions on human rights they merely stated they were raped without
attempting to describe the event. She shows how pain destroys language.
In South Africa where sexual assault is common knowledge, "women are
afraid to talk about these assaults", according to people who have worked
with detainees.

Although women and men are tortured equally, it is clear from South
African accounts and parallel international experience that the differing
constructions of gender shape their experience and treatment. Although
studies of political violence do not highlight men's gendered experience
of their torture, studies of ordinary prisoners reveal systematic attacks
on their masculinity. An interesting hypothesis, posed by Inger Agger
suggests that sexual torture of men aims to induce sexual passivity and
to abolish political power and potency, whereas, behind the sexual
torture of women is the activation of sexuality to induce shame and guilt.

Carolyn Nordstrom, argues that sexual assaults attack "the core
constructions of identity and security in their most personal and
profound sense". The intent is "to break down the fabric of society, and
... thus to break down political will and resistance". One could argue
that sexual assaults in the context of political detention/war are
institutionalised acts which make public the private.


i Physical assault

Jenny Schreiner talks about how the physical violence she experienced
while being tortured came as a particular shock to her as a woman. She
says:

Mostert ... insisted that I stand up. My response was that all Section 29
said in terms of detention was that they could hold me until I answered
questions, they couldn't even force me to answer questions. They can just
keep me until I answer questions, and that standing up was not part of
Section 29 and I was not standing up. I could answer questions or not
answer questions sitting down. At which stage he walked around the table
and physically picked me up and stood me up, but stood me up so that he
could slam my back into the wall. Which although, I mean he didn't
shatter my skull or anything, but it's a clear statement from step one.
"I am in control of this, I am bigger than you, I'm more aggressive than
you and I have no respect for you". And there I think that its also a
question of it being a gender thing. There's a man who is physically
picking you up and shoving you into a wall.

ii Rape and the threat of rape

In an anonymous interview, a woman described her experience in detention.

Some women actually have been raped in detention. And you yourself whilst
you are there you have that fear the whole time that you can be raped. I
had that fear, in particular after I had been up at the police offices
for interrogation and one of the security police intimated that the best
treatment for me would be rape.

Thenjiwe Mtintso also graphically described how the fear of rape is
always present for women detainees. One night, the police came to take
her away from the police station were she had been detained for the first
three months.

They stopped on the Kei bridge and there were about three men in the car
in which I was and about five men in the other car that was escorting us.
And when we got to the Kei bridge they asked me to get out of the car and
they all got out. And I had not minded being beaten or anything or even
died in the process but rape, just as far as I was concerned, this was
it. This was going to be a gang rape and they were just going to leave me
here...I wouldn't leave the car, so they dragged me out...they beat me
up...I had got a sense then that the others had wanted to rape but I
don't know, I can't say whether they were going to rape me but that is
when I got the fear that I could be raped.

Diana Russell interviewed Elaine Mohamed who said:

The way women experience detention is totally different from the way men
do. I burst into tears when a security policeman said to me, "I really
enjoy interrogating women. I can get things out of them and do things to
them that I can't do to a man." I was terrified by this statement. I felt
horror and pain about it when I was physically hit by the police, and I
think the police realised this immediately... I was body-searched twice a
day every day...I remember policewomen making me strip in front of men
and people laughing at me.

iii Withholding of medical care

Albertina Sisulu described the near-miscarriage of Winnie Mandela:

And at one time when we were in jail with Mrs Mandela she was threatening
(about to give birth) and they wouldn't let us as midwives attend to her.
It was terrible, she was bleeding and she could really lose the baby at
any moment, until we had to fight as women, then the door was opened.

Psychological forms of torture

The police developed sophisticated methods of psychological torture which
specifically aimed to undermine women. These methods targeted the
traditional roles and social location of women.

i Attack on women's identity

An anonymous detainee said her detention was different from a man's:

I think detention does affect us in the same way to a certain extent. But
a lot differs in terms of how you actually, in detail now, how you
actually experience detention. To start with the attitude of the police
towards you. They may try many ways to make you feel that you shouldn't
be here. A woman shouldn't be here. You are here because you are not the
right kind of woman, you are here because you are irresponsible, you are
here because your morals are low. They say all sorts of things to you.
You worry a lot about responsibilities outside prison, your
responsibilities. This last time, I was detained I had a child already
and that was my main source of worry and I felt guilty at times. I
wondered what was right, but then later I would be quite convinced that I
hadn't done anything wrong and in fact what I was doing would eventually
benefit myself, my child and humanity.

Jenny Schreiner describes how the security police would search for areas
of vulnerability in a detainee and use this to undermine her by trying to
make her feel diminished as a woman:

(There was) ruthless prying into an area of a person's personal life that
they knew was vulnerable...That all the kind of personal pain of a
marriage that doesn't work is brought to the fore and in a context where
they are going to send you back to a police cell to sit with nothing
other than the emotions that they've scratched open. You're thirty and
you're single, therefore there's something wrong with you as a woman, and
that's why you get involved with politics...They were attacking your
identity with their own particular conception of what a woman is...The
bizarre thing is that I had done a lot of work in DPSC. I'd spent a lot
of time listening to people who had been through detention, preparing the
detention manual, so I knew the methods that they were using...But
although, at the time that they're saying it, you know that and you can
sit there with your arms folded and kind of stare them back in the face.
When you go back into that police cell... you sit in that cell...your own
self image depends on the affirmation that you get from other people. And
that for me was what came through very strongly, because no matter how
much at the time that they were saying it (and rationally I knew that
they were talking rubbish), you go back into your cell and you sit there
and think, "well"! You know I think back over my life, my personal
relationships are difficult, maybe I am, maybe that's why this went
wrong...You internalise a whole lot of stuff because there's nobody else
to actually say `OK, so your relationships were difficult, but that
doesn't write you off as a person'...But when you're sitting there, it's
not so easy to keep your perspective. The emotional barrage that one is
under, the extent to which you have access to nobody other than people
who are doing everything to undermine your personality, to undermine
everything that they can see about you that is positive, they will find a
way of undermining.

ii Targeting women as mothers

One of the cruellest forms of torture used on women was related by two of
the women we interviewed. Albertina Sisulu describes how the security
police told her that her child was dying, and then that she had died.
They later told her that her husband was very ill.

In 63...I was tortured...the police would come, you know twice or three
times a day opening the door and saying "Are you sitting here, the child
is in the intensive care unit with pneumonia she can die any moment. If
you are not prepared to give us the statement then you won't bury that
child". Okey, I will remain thinking let the child die, if the nation is
saved. Doesn't matter I'm not going to say anything about what is
happening. What my husband did, others are doing. I knew a lot because I
was also now involved in politics. The worst was when they came, actually
came in the morning to say, "We've come to tell you that your baby has
passed away in the night". That torture is not for one day, three days,
but for ninety days of your detention. You are being tortured by this
today and tomorrow...Torture in jail is in many ways. They may not
torture you physically, but mentally they get to your brains... At one
time they said Walter was in hospital. "Would you like to go and see
him?" I said, "Oh yes!". "Not unless you do what we want you to do".
Sitting there thinking my husband is very ill. Sitting there thinking my
child is dead.

Thenjiwe Mtintso had a similar experience. The police obviously realised
that the best way to weaken women detainees was to make them believe that
their children were dead or dying. This would play into their worst fears
as mothers, and expose their deepest vulnerabilities. She relates the
following testimony:

When I was detained my son was nine months and I left him in bed...One
day they came in with a big photo in the Daily Despatch that showed a red
Volkswagen that had been smashed and I had a red Volkswagen at that time.
They said to me "You see, that is your car...one of your colleagues was
driving your car with your son inside and we were chasing him and that's
what happened to your car and your son is dead there"... That stayed with
me for the rest of my stay in prison. They would not say "No, he is not
dead". They just continued beating me up, beating me up... I don't know
what it would have done to a man, but that was one way of getting to a
woman.

iii Women as sexual objects

Thenjiwe Mtintso confirms the security police attempts to undermine her.
In her case they accused her of being involved in the struggle for sexual
gratification and undermined her contribution as a woman engaged in
politics. In her second detention, she says:

The police were beating me up, not because they were torturing me but
because I was giving some sexual satisfaction to these men, Steve Biko,
Mapethla Mohapi...all those that were in Black Consciousness around King
Williamstown....

She then describes how the torture changed in the second month of her
detention when they stopped focusing on her as a means to get information
on the male activists and they became angry with her for not breaking
down. She says:

Anger at me... for not fitting the stereotype of this woman who was going
to break down...so they got very angry that I was thinking that I was a
man. It was always "You think you are a man, you think you are strong, we
are going to bring you down, we've brought down better people than
yourself, men, strong men"...This is where they actually use your
womanhood. For instance, they would let you stand for the whole day and
you would not be allowed to go to a toilet or anything and it gets to a
point where you can't hold on so you will wee-wee standing there. And all
of them will be coming in and out just laughing at this women who just
pees anywhere. Around menstruation - because at some stage you've just
got to menstruate. You are just like this in a cell and there is nothing
and you are going to come in stinking obviously...after a month of
wearing those pants it is hard here and so as you walk ..and stink. That
is the humiliation then where your womanhood is used. "You are useless.
These men who sleep with you. Look at you how you smell."

3. The impact of race and class on women's experience of political
violence

Caesarina Kona Makhoere, poignantly describes the way in which apartheid
divisions structured prison life - food, clothing and prison
accommodation where qualitatively different for Asian, coloured and
African women. "If you want to find out what racial discrimination is,
just go to any South African prison. The reality is very hard. Here are
three people sharing the same table. Yet what they eat is divided on
racial lines. And you are expected not to be hurt. Mama Aminah has a
"coloured" diet, while the four of us - Aus Joyce, Aus Esther, Mama Edith
and myself have to eat rubbish food".

The experience of white detainees was also seen to be more privileged.
"Mothers of white detainees speak about their awareness that they have
had a privileged position in their access to family members and their
ability to afford legal help and access to international pressure". Jenny
Schreiner confirms that she felt she was at an advantage as a white women
in detention:

There was a very strong line that ran through the (interrogation), they
weren't questioning me with any seriousness, because my attitude was that
of the group of us that I knew had been detained, being white and middle
class and a woman I was in a far more protected position than a black
woman and two black men, and I decided that since we all had a fair
amount of overlap of knowledge, the best thing I could do was to shut up.

She notes, however, that her sheltered life may have made it much harder
for her to deal with the torture and the conditions of detention. She
attempted suicide during her detention after having "cracked" and made a
statement:

I think for me as a woman who grew up in a very secure background in an
environment in which violence was just not ever part of it. My Mother
gave my brother a hiding when he insisted for the fifty-fifth time of
playing with her electric sewing machine, and she burst into tears, I
mean that's the extent of violence, we'd get the occasional spank when we
were young. So my experience of personal violence has been incredibly
limited.

Barbara Hogan was at a particular disadvantage as a white woman during
her prison experience. The state had a policy of segregating prisoners
according to race. They also kept the political prisoners separately from
the criminal prisoners. For a long time she was the only prisoner during
her detention and imprisonment. She says:

You lose contact with the outside world, and inside you don't have a
supportive community around you...you know that you can always lose that
community, if you are lucky enough to have one, as has happened with many
women prisoners...you face enormous social and emotional deprivation
under those circumstances. I think that I always found myself very
profoundly affected by the threat of loss.

The majority of the victims of repression in the 1970s and 1980s were
young, black and came from working class backgrounds. The financial
burden of detention was very severe especially in communities such as the
Eastern Cape, where wives of detainees not only lost income due to their
husbands detention but were unable to find work for themselves due to the
high levels of unemployment. Middleton et al found that visitors to
jailed detainees felt guilty if they could not afford to take food or
clothes to the detainee. "Some did not visit their loved ones because
they had nothing to take to them."

The interview with Albertina Sisulu, Amina Cachalia and Sheila Weinberg
highlighted the different responses each woman received from her
(racially separate) community. Sheila Weinberg found the white community
very hostile to her family's involvement which made them feel isolated
and unable to trust other people. Amina Cachalia and Albertina Sisulu
were able to rely on members of their community to warn them when the
police were coming and to assist in looking after the children. Jessie
Duarte spoke of women from the Indian and coloured communities who were
ostracised by their families for becoming involved in resistance
politics. And of course, Lydia Kompe's whole life story, (set out above)
shows how race has permeated every aspect of people's experience in this
country, even going to the toilet.

4. Women as perpetrators

It is important to note that the perpetration of violence is not the
preserve of men alone. Institutionalised violence was perpetrated by
women in their capacity as officers of the state. There have been press
reports of women in hostels organising sex slavery and women central to
the necklacing of informers. Witch-burning has included women as much as
men. A full understanding of the multi-faceted and cross-gendered nature
of political violence in South Africa requires an exploration of these
issues.

Many feminist theorists have attempted to explain why women sometimes
collude in their own oppression and are even complicit in the oppression
of other women. We do not attempt to outline these debates here but,
through the words of some women, we will try to shed some light on this
complex issue in this section.

Jessie Duarte offers the following analysis :

In looking at the women who became involved by becoming spies, etc. of
the system it is quite clear that they may have a legitimate argument
that they were politically or economically unable to resist that.
Politically they did not need to get involved but economically they were
not able to resist the kind of money they were receiving especially in an
era where black women were not being employed by the system in other
ways. Yet the system was ready to employ them as political spies in the
community.

Nomvula Mokonyane says:

The role of women who were perpetrators who were not in State structures
which Jesse has mentioned also need to be looked at. Particularly the
women who were used as spies to infiltrate units and who were even used
in the ANC camps to inflict pain on men ... Women may have been used to
serve a particular interest. Some may have done it for economic reasons.
Others were actually forced to do it...

Mokonyane speaks also of the devastating effects of fear and uncertainty
on family life. She suggests a conscious strategy of destroying families
of opponents by the state:

The worst kind of female perpetrator is where you find wives acting
against their husbands - inflicting pain on their husbands, partners,
sisters, brothers, friends or even their own children. There are such
examples in this country. This occurs because of fear, uncertainty or
because of survival. Many families have broken up because of this. In
many instances the State has actually used what has been perceived as the
sexual weakness of women in such cases as where the man has been taken
into detention and they bring another man to have a relationship with
that woman while that man is detained. The relationship is exposed and
the whole fabric of that family is undone. The children are affected and
there is divorce. At the end of the day those women cannot be seen as
victims because people will just see them as corrupt women who were just
doing these things because their husbands were not there and fail to see
what actually led to the situation and pardon them and allow them to
speak so that they can understand themselves why that other man made
those advances, because I think they would be interested to know why it
happened and who actually made it to happen like that.

However, Mokonyane finds some acts of complicity inexplicable. The
torture of women by women was one example:

When it comes to the state machinery, though I can understand why it may
have been for economic reasons, when it comes to some women's actions
against other women it makes you wonder that you could actually find a
woman pumping water into another woman's fallopian tubes or attaching
electric shocks to another woman's nipples. The woman may be perpetrating
these acts for survival reasons but the infliction of pain and the manner
in which that pain is being inflicted this woman knows exactly what the
effects of that pain will be on that other woman. It is hard to know if
you will be able to reconcile with that woman perpetrator. It may be easy
to pardon some women but not some other women such as these. In many
instances women tend to be much more harsh and insensitive than men. For
example women [prison warders] may see a women giving birth in a single
cell and not intervene until or at all if a man intervenes. A woman
[warder] may not help a diabetic detainee who has collapsed in her cell
and help only arrives from a man. The treatment you may get from a female
prison warder, who may even be younger than your own children, will be
totally different than the treatment you get when Goldstone or the
Johannesburg magistrate comes. This may be related to the ego or attitude
of the woman warder because the prisoner is also a woman.

Barbara Hogan describes the transformation of a prison wardress who
started off as a "sweet little thing":

"For the first three days her eyes would be standing out and be red
because she'd been crying every night at having to lock people into
cells...And in six months that little same wardress would be demanding to
see sanitary towels soiled before she'd issue another sanitary towel...If
you take a prisoner's side...you lose all your esteem...you are socially
ostracised, and you don't get promotion."

Women who were spies, informers, warders and even torturers were all
strands in the complex web of our past. Many of these women were forced
to act as they did out of economic pressure, from fear, by being tricked
or threatened and because they were brought up in a society which told
them cruelty was a necessary response. Some of these reasons do not
adequately explain the degrees of cruelty that certain women perpetrated,
particularly against other women. Arguably, their own anger regarding
their own position in society was misdirected at other women who seemed
to so completely defy convention and move from the private into the
public realm. The resulting confusion, within a violent political context
may have allowed anger and pain to be transferred onto others through
cruelty. Understanding that women were capable of perpetrating violence
enables us to see that women are not monolithic in their outlook as a
group and are not bearers of certain essential qualities such as kindness
and compassion. Women, like men, are divided by race, class and ideology.
Many women supported apartheid and were fundamentally convinced through
their experience of the society, that racism and violence were necessary
mechanisms to ensure order, stability and to maintain a particular way of
life.

II. Sites of Political Violence

The history of women's experience of state violence set out above looks
mainly at state political violence such as detention, imprisonment and
assassination. There are a number of other sites of political violence
that are not adequately covered by this history. These correctly fall
within the ambit of the TRC and in order to fully understand our past we
need to further examine these sites.

1. Gender and Township Violence

The political violence of the 1980s had a wide ranging impact on all
South African's lives. In particular, the residents of black townships
were controlled by the army and police. Within this context of heightened
violence and fear, tensions developed between township residents. These
tensions related to accusations, often by young against old, of
collaboration and failure to stand up to the oppressors. Terrible methods
of punishing supposed informers developed, such as the infamous
"necklace". Many women were victims of these forms of violence. Political
and sexual conflict may have been played out in some of these cases where
women, the subject of sexual competition between men, became the target
of political violence. Evidence which came to light during a political
trial in the Eastern Cape indicated that a woman, whose boyfriend was a
"comrade", had been seen being given a fanta and a dress by a policeman.
She was labelled an informer and killed.

One of the campaigns of the 1980s was the consumer boycott of white-owned
shops -many women were victims of violence by "the comrade's" for failing
to heed the boycott. Viewed through a gender lens, women who had to meet
the household's needs on a tiny budget and who needed to shop at the
cheaper white-owned shops in town, would have found the boycott
particularly difficult to observe.

Pule Zwane has conducted a fascinating and chilling study linking rape in
the townships to the decline of political organisation, coupled with
unemployment and other factors. A group of youth in Sebokeng actually
formed a group called South African Rapist Association (S.A.R.A.). One of
the members of the group explained why he had participated in forming the
group:

"I was a comrade before joining this organisation. I joined it because we
were no longer given political tasks. Most of the tasks were given to
senior people. I felt that we have been used by these senior comrades
because I do not understand why they dumped us like this. Myself and a
group of six guys decided to form our own organisation that will keep
these senior comrades busy all the time. That is why we formed S.A.R.A.
We rape women who need to be disciplined (those women who behave like
snobs), they just do not want to talk to most people, they think they
know better than most of us and when we struggle, they simply do not want
to join us."

2. Violence in Kwa-Zulu/Natal

The conflict in Natal has grown out of the ethno-national politics
engendered by apartheid. The specific context of the conflict is a
complex one, involving a range of issues related to specific localities
and struggles. In rural areas, the threat of removals by the state during
the 1980s had led to pockets of organised opposition facilitated by the
Association for Rural Advancement, an organisation initiated by former
members of the Liberal Party, and supported by a range of progressive
lawyers and individuals. In informal settlements, such as Inanda and
Umbumbulu, struggles surfaced around access to resources for survival. In
Natal townships, incorporation into Kwa Zulu became a major issue of
conflict with the state, as did the issue of KwaZulu control over
education, teachers and schools. This was the context of the emergence of
a variety of civic, youth and women's organisations which formed the
United Democratic Front in Natal's urban townships. Inkatha saw this
coalition of organisations as a direct threat to its hegemony in the
region, particularly as a potential ally of the banned African National
Congress. In many areas, people known to belong to the UDF were attacked,
their homes burned, many were killed, and survivors became refugees. More
than a million people fled their homes in the ensuing decade. The
violence has been particularly brutal and sadistic, with considerable
evidence of collusion between the South African security establishment,
Inkatha, and armed vigilantes known as Amabutho. Evidence for the
existence of the infamous A-Team in Durban townships has been heard by
the TRC. Evidence suggests that these groups have punished women by means
of gang rape. Jenny Irish, coordinator of the Network of Independent
Monitors (NIM), has shown that during the early 1990s, the victims of
attacks by groups of armed men have often been women, children and the
elderly:

Often the women may be sexually brutalised before being killed. If men
are at home at the time of the attack they are often forced to stand by
and watch the attackers brutalize and kill the women and children in the
house before they themselves are killed.

In the refugee centres on the South Coast of Natal, sexual harassment
appears to have been prevalent:

the women have no privacy and often become targets for sexual abuse and
assault. In one refugee camp on the South coast at least three women were
forced to flee the camp after being raped by men in the camp.
Confidential discussions with other women in the camp revealed a chain of
sexual harassment.

This experience corresponds to classic accounts of the second world war
and more latterly the war in Bosnia. Again, this highly complex war in
Kwa-Zulu/Natal and its gendered consequences require further exploration
and examination.

3. Hostel/Third Force Violence

During the late 1980s and early 1990s townships on the Reef were torn
apart by large-scale violent conflicts, described at the time as being
perpetrated by a "third force". Evidence has since come to light that
much of this violence was state sponsored in an effort to disorganise
resistance and demoralise communities. Many of the victims of the "third
force" war were the poorest communities living in informal settlements.
In our society where race, class and gender have combined with the result
that women are the poorest and most disempowered, women have often
suffered most extremely from this type of violence. Women predominate in
informal settlements. They are particularly vulnerable to violence
because they often work from home or near the home, on the streets as
hawkers etc. Their relationship to the public space is linked to their
proximity to their homes and their location within the community. The
disruption of the home has particularly severe effects on women because
it removes their centre of security, their place of work and their
networks in the surrounding community.

The perception that men are the main victims of violence is reflected in
assistance provided after the Boipatong Massacres. Jessie Duarte notes
that in:

the Boipatong Massacre of June 1992, there were 128 people who died in
that massacre and 73 people who were eventually accused of having
perpetrated that massacre. Of the 128 victims about 48 were men and the
balance (80) were women. What was an interesting connection point that we
made was that it was only the families of the men who were ultimately
provided with legal assistance. The single women who died in that
incident were completely ignored. They were totally and absolutely
ignored as if they had nothing to contribute to society so they didn't
need to be given any kind of legal support.

Many families became refugees in their own country as they were forced
out of their homes during the hostel/township wars. The confiscation of
homes and the disruption of families was most often a burden borne by
women in these communities. A woman described how this occurred:

We left our home two weeks ago. Four men from the hostel questioned me
about my tribe. I replied that I am a Sotho. Then I was told to consider
leaving. They said Mgadi section is only for Zulus. They said that our
section is now Ulundi section...the following day ...I then phoned my
husband to inform him that we have left the area...On Sunday we went to
check the house under escort by the Katlehong police. We took our
property and left some of our furniture.

Evidence has also come to light that women from local townships on the
Reef have been abducted by men who have occupied the hostels. Abducted
women have been kept for days in the hostels and repeatedly sexually
abused. A feature of their abduction has been the performance of peculiar
rituals, such as drinking blood. On the basis of an understanding of some
of the symbolism attached to the historical role of abduction, one can
suggest what significance these actions have in the present.

Historically, abduction was associated with a ritualised and thus
symbolic exchange of women between different clans in marriage. The right
of men to control women is asserted in this socially sanctioned action.
This was accompanied by the exchange of lobolo, bride-wealth, which in
effect symbolised the reproductive significance of women. In the current
conflict, these actions by hostel dwellers are a travesty of this early
tradition, but clearly resonate with it. One might argue that this is
part of a strategy to demoralise those engaged in the local political
contest. The violation of township women humiliates not only the women,
but crucially also implicates the men who symbolically have control, and
are thus responsible for the protection of those women.

Jessie Duarte describes the "third force" violence as indirect
repression. She argued that there was:

An absolute determined attempt to undermine an entire commmunity's
existence because it was seen to be a community that was very firm in its
opposition to apartheid. The whole purpose of undermining the East Rand,
and Katorus in particular, was to bring down the community's morale to
such an extent that today you have a youth cadre in that community with a
very poor morale base and actually no real instinct for human survival
except as to see themselves as beneficiaries of the State because 'they
deserve to get what was taken away from them.'

She suggests that the hostel system has created the conditions for the
brutality with which hostel dwellers have engaged in township struggles:

The long term effects of the Katorus experience may be something which we
all want to put our minds to. Similarly the long-term effects of hostel
dwelling and the absolute repression of being forced to live as a single
man or a single woman in a hostel situation... The fact of the matter is
that the political repression of the kind that locked a male of twenty
years old behind a fence at nine o'clock at night and later on went on to
recruit that same young man to become a killing machine is something that
we need to examine.

Where did this originate from and which of the apartheid sociologists
understood that triggering that mechanism in that way would provide the
best killers that our society has ever known? The most ruthless kind of
killers came out of the recruitment of young men out of hostels
throughout the country, not just the East Rand. I think we are going to
miss out on a lot of the essence of finding out what made the system as
cruel as it was if we concentrate on the individual victims only and not
look at the collective victimisation of whole communities.

4. Violence against women in neighbouring states

In Mozambique, considerable evidence has emerged from research and
counselling carried out in refugee camps in South Africa, of women being
raped before their husbands and of sons being forced to rape their own
mothers, amongst a range of horrifying forms of abuse. Both women and
children appear to have been abducted to RENAMO camps, where children
were taught how to kill. First they were taught how to kill animals, then
people, and sometimes they were forced to kill their own parents. Those
young boys were also taught to rape. The women who were abducted to
RENAMO camps were made into cooks, carriers of arms, and were used as sex
slaves.

The Mozambiquean legal unit has called for the TRC to extend its scope
beyond South Africa's borders.

RENAMO was a South African surrogate but even more direct evidence of
culpability of South Africa's security forces exists in Namibia of abuses
against SWAPO and other Namibian women. There is a large body of evidence
in this regard which must be gathered and further examined. The SADFs
strategy, if there was one, regarding rape of enemy women must be
researched. The notorious Koevoet Unit and other military personnel,
including 32 Battalion have committed many reported rapes within a
broader campaign of terror to subdue the Namibian people, particularly in
the North of the country.

5. Gendered violence in the Liberation Movements

The Commission is obliged by the Act to deal with all gross human rights
violations "emanating from the conflicts of the past". The Act requires
even-handedness in the Commission's treatment of apartheid crimes and
criminal acts committed within the liberation movement's camps. Dullah
Omar recently said "Those who committed apartheid crimes were
participating in crimes against humanity. There are cases where members
of liberation movements committed human rights violations, but not one
instance in which liberation movements participated in crimes against
humanity." We would agree with this statement in relation to the
apportioning of blame as a way in which moral judgments can be written
into the history that emerges from the TRC. Within this moral framework,
however, there is a need to expose and examine the abuses which occurred
in the camps. They are also a part of our history.

We would submit that apartheid was a coordinated system within which
horrifying abuses were legally sanctioned. Abuses in the camps must be
understood both in terms of individual criminal acts and within the
context of the conditions of the camps and the nature of the war being
fought. Where women were abused in the camps, this needs to be
acknowledged and condemned by those involved. If South Africa is to
become a truly democratic society with a human rights culture, the
message needs to be clearly conveyed that the oppression of women,
including sexual abuse and harassment are unacceptable wherever they
occur.

We were unsuccessful in our attempts to speak to women about their
experiences in the camps. In an interview with Caesarina Kona Makhoere
she expressed an unwillingness to speak about the camps but intimated
that her experience had been terrible. She said "At least in prison I
knew I was in the enemy camp". We interviewed Thenjiwe Mtintso, a senior
member of the ANC's army about her experiences. She said she had no
personal experience of sexual abuse in the camps and explains that this
may have been because "I had already been in the front command structures
so I didn't come fresh from home into the camps. And secondly, I had the
advantage of a better understanding of gender and how it plays itself
out". She was aware of allegations of rape in the camps and says that
women are reluctant to talk about their experiences for two reasons.
Firstly, on a personal level, they are not easily able to talk about
rape. Secondly, on an organisational level, they do not wish to have
their experiences used politically in the TRC where apartheid is equated
morally with the ANCs actions. Some of these women have chosen to
participate in an organisational submission being prepared by the ANC
rather than come forward individually but it is as yet unknown whether
the submission will cover acts such as rape.

Mtintso provided some insight into the circumstances which existed in the
camps which may have led to sexual abuse or rape.

"I think that on the one hand, just like in any society where you have
the power relations between men and women, with the men having the power,
and where you have rape in society, I don't think that it was
something...peculiar to that kind of society in the camps...(It) is to do
with gender relations. There is something about being in a camp
situation, about sometimes people feeling the hopelessness of the whole
thing and about the frustrations of being in a forest perpetually and not
seeing your way ever of getting out. There was always hope, of course,
but there was always that bleakness some days and that frustration.

She argues that the men's experiences before reaching the camps shaped
their aggression and attitudes towards women:

And there was also an element in my own view of some of the comrades who,
I would say, were dented somehow in terms of their experiences inside the
country and everything and you would then say that psychologically they
are people that would have needed attention, therapy or whatever.
However, that opportunity was not there. So they find themselves in the
camp. And that then manifests itself in aggression. For some of them the
aggressive behaviour you could actually look at as frustration on the one
hand, but the experiences, on the other, which some of them had gone
through. and this leaves this dented individual in terms of their
psychological make-up, in terms of their view of life. In that context
then they hate women.

She also suggests that women's success challenged men's sense of
themselves and their male identity:

I have looked at comrades who just get so angry and frustrated because
women performed better than they did. And I can imagine that anger
translating itself in one or another way. The man could easily want to
prove his manhood, his masculinity in terms of "I am still a powerful
individual" and that could, I'm not saying it did, that could result in
rape. And most of the people that were in the camps are people that had
gone through the hands of the police and I would then argue that in one
way or another this affected them. Even those that had not gone through
the hands of the police, the comrades had left their homes very young and
therefore they missed out on the proper developmental stages as well as
parental guidance in terms of their relations with individuals,
particularly with women.

Mtintso sees parallels between the anger of the security police and some
of the men in the camps towards independent and strong women:

And looking at some of their behaviours, their anger with women
performing better, I remember the anger of the security police with me
not breaking down. Their anger was more than the anger that they expected
or they showed to males. When you are a women they expected you to break
down quickly. And when you don't break down quickly they really get so
angry with you because you are beginning to break down their beliefs that
women are weak and so on. And on the other hand you will then also find
the reason as to why you were there, why you were detained, why you were
going around with these men is because you were sleeping with all these
people. In my case, from the university days when I started getting
detained there was always this consistency of "I am a bitch and that is
why I get detained with these men because in 1973 there were about two
women and about forty men and from then on I kept on being the only woman.

So, I can see that the anger of men in the camps with a woman who
performs better and the anger of the security police who performs better
in terms of resistance than the men, because that then destroys the
stereotypes. And it then means for me, in terms of the treatment that you
get as a woman probably is double-barrelled in that you get worse
treatment from the boers because they don't want you to behave in that
manner and you still get worse treatment from your own comrades because
they don't expect you to perform better. It's a can't -win situation.

Mtintso suggests that the lack of support structures in the camps may
have prevented some of these "dented" people from getting help:

One was relating this with one of the comrades that I have known who had
raped, subsequently committed suicide and to me I had always looked at
him, I mean knowing him in the camps and felt that, you know, this is one
person you want to sit down with and go beyond what the commissars were
doing and so on. That support system that says "talk about it". "What is
really eating you up?" But he had been tortured a lot and then he raped,
I heard. He was tortured inside the country, left the country, joined MK
and remained in the camps very sort of reserved and unhappy. I knew him
and subsequently I heard that he had raped somebody, which he denied, and
a few months later he committed suicide. So really I was just looking at
that relationship of what could have caused this.

Mtintso also talks about the rapes and sexual abuse that occurred in the
underground structures of the liberation movement. She says the men knew
that women would not want to talk about having been raped. One of her
comrades said to her:

"You know, it's going to get to the point that I am going to rape you.
And it's going to be very easy to rape you ... and I know that there is
no way that you are going to stand in front of all these people and say I
raped you".

The prevailing sexism in society coupled with the extreme conditions of
the underground lifestyle resulted in men at times taking advantage of
women. Nomvula Mokonyane refers to:

The situation where women had to shun or take off the pride and the
integrity that they had by sharing rooms or bathrooms with groups of
young men and losing all privacy as a young woman. These women had to
live as if everything was normal while actually knowing at the end of the
day that this actually diminished your integrity and pride as an
individual".

Mtintso describes how "comrades who were contacts inside the country
would come outside to report...these experiences. They would put up a
comrade in a particular place and comrades would sleep with them. And
that's rape. That for me is rape."

We have not attempted to research the male gendered constructions
developed within the liberation armies and the methods used to ensure
conformity and compliance. An understanding of these issues may shed
light on some of the incidents committed in the camps. Part of the
explanation for what occurred in the camps highlights the link between
sexual abuse and domestic violence, in that all these forms of abuse flow
from the way society condones, and even supports, discrimination and
disadvantage of women in our society. When issues of sexual abuse
surface, such as the publicising of abuse by her partner by Thandi
Modise, a former MK soldier, they are often censored. The issue of
censorship also came up in Zimbabwe where a film, entitled "Flame",
highlighting abuse of women guerillas was censored.

There is currently a debate going on in Namibia about SWAPO torture of
supposed "informers" during the liberation struggle. The government have
attacked those who are raising the issues as divisive and disloyal
opponents who are trying to raise something which should be best left in
the past. There is also a veil of silence in South Africa regarding some
of the experiences within the ANC. We need to be cognisant of the
psychological literature that indicates the difficulties many people face
in talking about sexual abuse. But we also need to consider the important
goal of highlighting the abuse of women so that change can begin to occur
in this regard. The only way to do this properly is to explore these
issues openly - we do have to lift the veil of silence.

E. AMNESTY AND GENDER

What is a political offence ?

Section 20 of the Act allows for the granting of amnesty where an act is
"associated with a political objective committed in the course of the
conflicts of the past". While apartheid violence against women needs to
be understood as part of a political response to resistance, there is a
concern that many perpetrators, such as policemen who raped women, should
not be allowed to fall within the amnesty net. Jessie Duarte says:

It is going to be very prudent for a number of perpetrators to argue that
being accused of rape is simply a matter of whether that person can prove
it or not. Whether rape is considered a political act with political
motivations is going to be incredibly difficult.

There is a concern that in granting rapists amnesty, this might suggest a
tolerance for the oppression of women in society, an acknowledgment that
in certain conditions, rape will not be punished. This is not
uncontroversial. Can one divide an act such as rape into political and
criminal components? Some would argue that a torturer may rape a woman
both in order to violate an enemy and in order to take out his personal
anger against women. Can these motives be separated?

Jacklyn Cock refers to the rapes in the war in South Africa. She cites a
sworn statement made by a 70 year old woman in Cradock. The woman
describes how she was walking in the street and some white soldiers
stopped her and lifted her into the military vehicle. After a short
distance the vehicle stopped and they pushed her out. Two soldiers then
raped her violently. She says "The two soldiers were very young. The one
held my arms while the other lifted my dress and removed my slip and
panties. I said,"What are you doing, children ?" The one replied, "Ons
gaan jou naai. As jy nie wil, gaan ons jou doodmaak."

This incident suggests that rape may have been a sanctioned activity by
the SADF. If not a conscious strategy, the SADFs role in using violence
and rape was to terrorise, intimidate and punish.

Carolyn Nordstrom suggests that rape is a dirty war tactic often a public
display intended to "break down the fabric of society". She says "It is
an attack directed equally against personal identity and cultural
integrity". In this interpretation rape can "be understood as an abuse
which targets women for political and strategic reasons". Rape is a war
crime in terms of the Geneva Convention whether or not it occurs on a
large scale or is associated with a coherent policy. It also applies to
individual rapes used as "torture or cruel and inhuman treatment".

Section 20(3) of the Act enables the Amnesty Committee to assess whether
a particular act was associated with a political objective. It is
submitted that the process of examining a rapist's act by the Committee
will allow the political nature of rape to be highlighted, whether or not
amnesty is granted. It is further suggested that in most cases, such acts
will not be able to fall within the criteria of a political act as
defined by the Act. Much of the testimony from women who suffered rights
violations suggests that the threat of rape, sexual assault and rape were
committed "out of personal malice, ill-will or spite, directed against
the victim" in addition to the political motives or orders from a
superior that may have existed. Our interpretation of the Act is that
where section 20(3)(ii) applies, the perpetrator will not receive amnesty
even if that person's act also meets the criteria set out in section
20(3)(a)-(f). Given the difficulty of separating the political and the
personal motive in sexual abuse, few perpetrators are likely to be
granted amnesty. Nevertheless, the Commission as a whole needs to focus
public attention on the use of sexual abuse within the political
conflicts of the past in all aspects of its work.

The major difficulty however, which may render much of the above
irrelevant, is the unlikely possiblity that rapists or rape victims will
come forward to the Commission. In conducting this research we found it
very difficult to get women to talk about their experiences of rape. In
all the already recorded testimonies, we could find no personal account
of rape. Yet many of the people we interviewed knew of women who had been
raped. Jessie Duarte says:

I think I can speak fairly comfortably about a number of women who were
in fact raped in prison cells while in detention or in the van that was
taking them to detention. The women struggled with trauma after these
rapes. Furthermore there are many other implications which I would like
to spell out. Firstly, women could not say they were raped in the
eighties because from the position of the people they worked with that
was considered a weakness. If women said that they were raped they were
regarded as having sold out to the system in one way or another. Quite
frankly speaking the most vicious people were women themselves. When
women who were raped came and told other women about their rapes, those
women were quite vicious about those particular incidents having
happened. The consequences of these rapes were the same for these women
as criminal rapes. A political rape has no different consequences. It has
exactly the same reason behind it - a violent act against a woman...In
fact the women were being punished as women.

Mandisa Monakali of the Ilitha Labantu Centre, dealing with female abuse
victims, was reported as saying "the wives and widows of political
prisoners are walking around with wounds. But nobody wants to talk about
them." Women do not speak about rape out of shame, for fear of loss of
status, because they do not want to relive the pain, and because they are
often unwilling to subject themselves to cross-examination by the accused
person's defence lawyer. Jessie Duarte says:

We also need to consider the women who are going to come before the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and talk about these experiences. What
about the loss of pride that they will experience at the time when they
talk about it? How are we going to deal with that issue? The incident may
have happened ten years earlier and the woman may have dealt with the
trauma by herself without ever having lost that loss of pride. Now that
woman is being asked to recreate that loss of pride. Furthermore the
woman knows that in coming forward to say so-and-so raped me that she may
not necessarily see justice being done. All that these women will do is
to add to the historical understandings of levels of repression. I think
this is fine and many women will be happy to do this. But there has to be
consideration for the other side - for the emotional trauma that women
have gone through. Some of these women are now in high-powered positions
- in government or as executives. How will it impact on them now in the
positions that they hold given the gender bias that people have about
sexually abused women and the concept that women always ask for it anyway?

In a sense, we are asking women to come forward and say those things. So
we need a support mechanism for these women. One of the thirty-nine
non-negotiables in the Constitution is the right to privacy but for those
women who come forward and tell their stories to the Commission, this
privacy is forever violated. I wonder how those women are going to be
able to deal with their own environment having elected to violate her
privacy in a very public way?... The Commission is actually asking people
to open the empty cupboard and expose that there are no groceries in the
cupboard and then they have to live with that.


The Act gives the Commission some powers to limit cross-examination,
powers to investigate matters, to hold in camera hearings and to keep the
identity of witnesses out of any reports. We make a number of suggestions
below as to how the Commission can make use of the Act in order to
address these problems in dealing with cases such as those mentioned
above.

F. REPARATIONS AND GENDER

The Act requires that victims make application for reparation to the TRC.
The Commission obviously requires knowledge of those who have suffered
gross human rights violations before it is able to assist them.
Nevertheless, the Commission needs to be mindful of the fact that many
victims will find it extremely difficult to approach the TRC for help. As
has been argued above, women who have themselves suffered violations and
in particular, those who have suffered sexual abuse, find it very
difficult to speak openly about their experiences. Women tend to define
their suffering in relation to other people such as their husbands and
children and are reluctant to make public their own experiences of abuse
which society often sees as belonging in the private realm.

The other aspect of women as indirect victims, discussed above, must be
considered. A number of women who have already approached the TRC have
explained that losing a husband or child is the loss of a potential
breadwinner in addition to the loss of social status and the obvious
emotional pain and loss. Women, like June Mlangeni, lost their jobs
because of the imprisonment of their husbands. Children's schooling had
to be stopped, electricity was cut off and furniture and property was
repossessed.

The reparation and rehabilitation process should not simply be available
for those who want it. Despite the possibly limited resources available
for reparation and despite the already huge workload facing the
Commission, the TRC should not shie away from actively encouraging people
to come forward to claim reparation. The Truth and Reconciliation process
needs to be one aimed at healing the whole society. This places a
positive obligation on the Commission to begin this process as
comprehensively as possible by seeking out those who are in need of help.

In formulating a reparations and rehabilitation policy the Commission
needs to consider whether women have specific needs and interests. It
needs to take cognisance of the requests that people have made in their
evidence to the Commission. But the modesty of some of the requests
should not deter the Commission from carefully considering an appropriate
reparations policy.

There are a wide range of opinions as to how best to rehabilitate and
make reparations. Some have suggested that people should receive
actuarially quantified monetary compensation as they would in a civil
damages claim, particularly as amnesty denies them their right to pursue
civil actions against the perpetrators. The arguments against this
position vary from the practical (there is not enough money), to the
principled (people cannot be compensated financially for their
suffering). All of these arguments need to be carefully considered and
any assertions such as, "there is no money" need to be backed up by
factual evidence and research. The policy also needs to be considered in
light of the definition of "gross human rights violations" which we have
suggested should be read extremely widely. Finally, the impact of
reparations must be looked at not simply from the vantage point of the
individual but also from that of the community of which that person is a
part.

It must also be noted that the quantification of civil damages claims by
the courts have been criticised by gender analysts all over the world for
allowing gender bias to limit the size of the awards that women get.
Calculation of quantum often ignores the unpaid labour of women and the
other caring functions women fulfil, such as looking after the disabled.
The calculation also looks at the individual's potential life chances in
determining the loss of quality and expectation of life. This also needs
to be studied for gender bias as the calculation is premised on a society
which affords women little opportunity to improve their life chances and
standards.

We believe that the TRC process is not just aimed at healing one
generation's pain. It is also aimed at setting in place the framework for
the building of a human rights culture to be treasured by future
generations. Part of the reparation and rehabilitation process is the
public acknowledgment of our history and a commitment to a better future.
We would stress the need for creative public education which not only
highlights the truth of our past but also locates gender as a central
aspect of the analysis of our past.

G. PROPOSED MECHANISMS TO ACCOMMODATE GENDER IN THE TRC PROCESS

1. We suggest that the TRC actively rejects a gender-neutral approach
towards its analysis of evidence and in all other aspects of its brief.
This means that gender must be incorporated into the TRCs policy
framework, for without this framework, gender issues, and women's voices
in particular, will not be heard and accurately recorded.

Human Rights Violations

2. The process of taking statements requires asking the right questions
so as to properly enable people to reflect their real experience. Gender
issues come into play here. In much of the torture literature, the
writers point to the reluctance of many people to revisit the full horror
of their experiences. There is a particular difficulty associated with
discussing sexual abuse, both because of general social and cultural
taboos and because of the added pain that reliving such abuse causes.
Some of the literature observes that women often describe sexual torture
in vague and general terms. Questionnaires should be carefully
reconsidered and further briefing of statement-takers may need to take
place.

3. The Commissioners should consider how to question victims sensitively
and should be aware that it may not always assist the victim to explore
the abuse in graphic detail. At the same time, however, the Commission
should not avoid "embarrassing" subjects like sexual abuse as this
reinforces the way our society often hides such abuse and relegates it to
the "private" realm. The TRC should invite psychologists who have worked
with abused women to brief them on how to speak to victims.

4. Women who have approached the TRC in the case of another victim, their
husband or son or father, should also be encouraged to speak of their own
experience of harassment, detention etc. where this occurred. While the
Act may require the Human Rights Violations Committee to determine that a
person is a victim for the purposes of reparation and rehabilitation, the
Act does not prevent the Commission from asking people about their own
experiences.

5. The Commission should encourage women who have been raped or sexually
assaulted within the context of the past conflicts to come forward to
speak about their experiences. This public encouragement will in itself
help our society to understand how abuse of women formed part of a
political struggle and that such abuses are considered gross human rights
violations. This can be done both through statements to the press and
through NGOs and community organisations such as COSATU and the Rural
Women's Movement.

6. The Commission should publicise section 38 of the Act which binds all
members and employees of the TRC to the preservation of confidentiality.
Women need to know that they can come forward without other people
knowing about it, and can give their statement to a person in safe and
private conditions. They should be informed that they do not have to
repeat their statement in front of the whole Commission in public and
under the glare of television cameras.

7. Women should be able to request that their statements be taken by
women and they be allowed to further elaborate on their statements in
closed hearings, possibly only to women Commissioners. This may make it
much easier for women to speak openly about their experiences as cultural
and social pressures often prevent women from discussing sexual matters
in front of men.

8. During the course of our research it has become clear that women will
often relate other women's experiences told to them by the woman who is
unable to speak more openly of the experience herself. We suggest that
the Commission should arrange for group hearings where women in
particular communities are invited to come forward. These could be
arranged in conjunction with women's organisations and counselling
centres that have been working with these communities. They could be
attended by women commissioners only, if necessary, and psychologists or
social workers could assist in the conducting of the hearing.

9. Similar hearings could be held for men who suffered sexual abuse
during torture and who may also benefit from a single-gender forum. Men
should be encouraged to come forward to speak about their wives, mothers,
daughters and sisters who were victims of rights violations.

10. The Act does not address the issue of expert evidence. While the
short time available to the Commission is a real concern, expert
testimony may be particularly useful in providing insights into some of
the matters which emerge from the submissions. This needs to be
considered, particularly in light of the fact that victims of sexual
violence often do not talk about their experiences explicitly.

11. The TRC should call a meeting with the press to encourage them to
give prominence to women's experiences and some of the gender issues
raised in this submission. The TRC should use other media opportunities
such as radio and television interviews to highlight gender in the TRC
process.

Amnesty (these points apply equally to the Human Rights Violations
Committee)

12. The Commission needs to consider some of the legal issues which face
it as a quasi-judicial body. There is considerable foreign research
examining judicial bias towards women. This relates to judicial attitudes
towards credibility of women witnesses and the way the probability of
their evidence is viewed. It also relates to judicial ignorance of the
social context of women's experiences, proven male identification with
witnesses and accused persons and stereotyping of women's position.
Gendered assumptions creep into judicial fora and the Commission needs to
consider how they should be handled. A number of NGOs are currently doing
work on judicial training and could be approached for assistance in this
regard.

13. The Commission should require that cross-examination of victims be
conducted sensitively and without causing further harm to the witness.
The principles as set out in section 11 of the Act should inform the
Commission's approach regarding its requirements for cross-examination.

Reparations

14. The reparations policy must be carefully considered with due regard
to a gendered understanding of past abuses and the impact of such abuses.
Women must be encouraged to come forward and must be asked about their
needs. The policy must be forward-looking in its approach and must
provide for the building of a human rights culture where all forms of
discrimination and abuses against women are unacceptable. Women's
organisations and other NGOs should be involved in the formulation of the
reparations policy.

15. If some of the reparations are quantified according to the approach
used in civil damages claims, research must be conducted into the way in
which gender bias tilts this standard away from rewarding women fully for
their loss.

16. The TRC should assist women by directing them towards existing
programmes and resources in communities aimed at providing assistance of
all kinds e.g. pensions, housing, education and counselling.

17. A memorial list of the women who were killed and the circumstances of
these deaths should be considered. This could be just one of the aspects
of a process of preserving our collective memory of past abuses.

18. A Peace Institute should be established, which houses a museum and
research facilities. It should ensure that gender is an integrated focus
of all projects undertaken there.

Final Report

19. The Act requires the Commission to "initiate, coordinate and
facilitate" inquiries and the gathering of information regarding all
matters relating to rights violations. We propose that a specific
research project be conducted looking at the role of gender in past
abuses.

20. The Commission should ensure that a gender analysis to develop a
framework and to periodize our history is used in the writing of the
final report and that due weight is given to the differing experiences of
men and women in recording our country's history. Further research should
be conducted into many of the areas mentioned in this submission.

21. The TRC should carefully consider the proposals it makes as to how
the report should be used to educate future generations.

H. CONCLUSION

This submission highlights many facets to the pain and suffering that
violence in South Africa caused to women and men in particular ways. It
also focuses on the violence and inequality which are an ongoing part of
women's lives in this country. These abuses are still occurring although
within an altered political context. By raising these issues within the
TRC process we cannot simply put them behind us and assume that abuse of
women has been neatly dealt with in our past and reconciliation has
occurred. Examining the conditions which allow women to be harmed and
violated should focus all our attentions on the need to eradicate this
ongoing abuse. If the TRC is to leave a valuable legacy it must lift the
veil of silence hanging over the suffering of women and must incorporate
the struggle to end this suffering in the struggle for human rights in
our country.

While violence and cruelty are depressing and difficult topics to engage
with we should not reduce our subjects to the status of victim alone. We
must also celebrate the bravery of South African women and take note that
the aim of this enquiry and research is a positive one ie: to highlight
the need for the protection of fundamental human rights so as to work
towards our vision of a transformed society.

We conclude with an untitled poem by Dorothy Mfaco, sent to Jenny
Schreiner in prison. The poet celebrates the courage and the vision of
women, a sentiment which we endorse:

"There is a world where people walk alone

And have around them men with hearts of stone

Who would not spare one second of their day

Or spend their breath just to say your pain is mine

That world is not ours.

We will build a new one

Where we wake in comfort and ease

And strive together to create a world of love and peace"

I. APPENDIX

LIST OF INTERVIEW INFORMANTS

1. ALBERTINA SISULU, MP

2. AMINA CACHALIA

3. SHEILA WEINBERG, GAUTENG MPL

4. THENJIWE MTINTSO, MP

5. JENNIFER SCHREINER, MP

6. CAESARINA KONA MAKHOERE

7. LYDIA KOMPE, MP

8. SUSAN CONJWA

J. BIBLIOGRAPHY

ABERG, M-B Jansson & ANDERSSON, I.E. "Care and Rehabilitation of Women
suffering Sexual Violence from the War in the Republics of the Former
Yugoslavia". Paper presented to the Nordic Conference on The Health
Aspects of Refugee Families in Nordic Countries. Linkoping, November 1994.

AGGER, I. "Sexual Torture of Political Prisoners: an overview" Journal of
Traumatic Stress Vol 2, no 3, 1989. 305-318.

ALLODI, F & STIASNY, S. "Women as Torture Victims" Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry Vol 35, March 1990. 144-148.

ANONYMOUS "Detention" Agenda 4, 1989. 23-29.

ANTI-SLAVERY INTERNATIONAL "Trafficking and slavery of Mozambican
refugees in S. Africa" Unpublished briefing to United Nations Economic
and Social Council, Commission on Human Rights, May 1993.

BEALL, J et al "African Women in the Durban Struggle, 1985-1986: towards
a transformation of roles?" South African Review 4. Ravan Press,
Johannesburg, 1987.

BEIJING CONFERENCE REPORT: 1994 Country Report on the Status of South
African Women. Edited by P. Govender.

BELL, A.N. & MACKIE, R.D.A. Detention and Security Legislation in South
Africa Centre for Adult Education, University of Natal, Durban, 1985.

BERNSTEIN, H. For their Triumphs and for their tears: women in apartheid
South Africa. International Defence and Aid for Southern Africa, London,
1985.

CLEAVER, T & WALLACE, M. Namibia: women in war Zed Books, London, 1990.

COCK, J. War and Society: the militarisation of South Africa. David
Philip, Cape Town, 1989.

COOPER, C. & ENSOR, L. The African Woman's Handbook on the Law. South
African Institute of Race Relations, Johannesburg, 1980.

DIEU DE, T. Thi. "Vietnamese women and sexual violence" Unpublished
Report, Refugee Health Care Centre, Rijswijk, March 1989.

FEDERATION OF TRANSVAAL WOMEN, A Woman's place is in the Struggle, not
behind bars! FEDTRAW, Johannesburg, n.d.

FIRST, R. 117 Days: an account of confinement and interrogation under the
South African ninety-day detention law. Bloomsbury, London, 1988.

FOSTER, D. Detention and Torture in South Africa: psychological, legal
and historical studies. David Philip, Cape Town, 1987.

FRANCO, J. "Gender, death and resistance: facing the ethical vacuum" in
Fear at the Edge: state terror and resistance in Latin America edited by
J.E. Corradi et al, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1992.
104-118.

GENDER POLICY GROUP, DURBAN "State, Gender and Restructuring in South
Africa in the 1980s" Paper presented to the Conference on Women and
Gender in Southern Africa, Durban 1991.

GERHART, G.M. Black Power in South Africa: the evolution of an ideology.
University of California Press, Berkeley, 1978.

GRAYCAR,R and MORGAN,J The Hidden Gender of Law. The Federation Press,
Sydney, 1990.

HASSIM, S et al "A Bit on the Side? Gender struggles in the politics of
transformation in South Africa" Transformation, No 5, 1987, 3-32.

HEISE, L et al "Violence against Women: a neglected public health issue
in less developed countries" Social Science Medicine Vol 39, no 9, 1994,
1165-1179.

HYSLOP, J. "School student movements and state education policy:
1972-87", in W.Cobbett and R.Cohen (eds), Popular Struggles in South
Africa. James Currey, London, 1988.

INTERNATIONAL DEFENCE AND AID FUND Namibia: the facts. IDAF, London, 1989.

INTERNATIONAL DEFENCE AND AID FUND Review of 1989: repression and
resistance in South Africa and Namibia.(Fact Paper on Southern Africa, v.
18) IDAF, London, 1989.

INTERNATIONAL DEFENCE AND AID FUND To Honour Women's Day: profiles of
leading women in the South African and Namibian liberation struggles.
IDAF/UN, London, 1981.

INTERNATIONAL DEFENCE AND AID FUND Women under Apartheid in Photographs
and text. IDAF/UN, London, 1981.

IRISH, J. "Massacres, Muthi and Misery: women and political violence",
Agenda. 16, 1993.

KAGANAS, F & MURRAY,C.(eds), Gender and the New South African Legal
Order. Juta, Cape Town, 1994.

KONIG, B. Namibia: the ravages of war; South Africa's onslaught on the
Namibian people. IDAF, London, 1983.

LODGE, T. Black politics in South Africa since 1945. Ravan, Johannesburg,
1985.

LONCAR, M. "Rape as method of torture and as war crime", RAHAT's Medical
Journal, Vol 1, No 3, November 1994.

MAKHOERE, C.K. No Child's Play: in prison under apartheid. The Women's
Press, London, 1988.

MANICOM, L. "Ruling Relations: rethinking state and gender in South
African history" Paper presented to the Conference on Women and Gender in
Southern Africa, Durban 1991.

MEIJER, M. "Some aspects of Oppression in the Torture of Women"
Unpublished paper, Lochem, 1985.

MIDDLETON, S et al. "The Hidden Burden: the impact of detention on the
women left behind", Paper presented to the Conference on Women and Gender
in southern Africa, Durban, January 1991.

MORRIS, P. A History of Black Housing in South Africa. South Africa
Foundation, Johannesburg, 1981.

MOSER, C.O.N. Gender Planning and Development: theory, practice and
training. Routledge, London, 1993.

NORDSTROM, C. "Women and War: observations from the field" Minerva:
quarterly report on Women and the Military, Vol IX, no 1, Spring 1991,
1-15.

NORDSTROM, C. "What John Wayne never told us: sexual violence in war and
peace" Forthcoming in Good Girls/Bad Girls: sex violence and power in the
nineties to be published by Rutgers University Press.

NUSAS WOMEN'S CONFERENCE REPORT, 1982. Mimeo, 1982.

POSEL, D. The Making of Apartheid, 1948-1961: conflict and compromise.
Oxford University Press, 1991.

POSEL, D. "Women's power, men's authority: rethinking patriarchy" Paper
presented to the Conference on Women and Gender in southern Africa,
Durban, 1991.

Report of the Chilean National Commission on Truth and Reconciliation,
Volume 2, Chapter 4.

ROMERO, M. "A comparison between strategies used on prisoners of war and
battered wives" Sex Roles. Vol 13, nos 9/10, 1985, 537-547.

RUSSELL, D.E.H. Lives of Courage: women for a new South Africa. Basic
Books, New York, 1989.

SCHADEBERG, J. Voices from Robben Island. Ravan Press, Randburg, 1994.

SCHREINER, B. (ed), A Snake with Ice Water: prison writings by South
African women. Congress of South African Writers, Johannesburg, 1992.

SIMPSON, G. & VAN ZYL, P. "South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation
Commission" Centre for the Study of Violence and Reconciliation, 1994.

SOUTH AFRICAN PRESSCLIPS Women in South Africa: a presscuttings
supplement. 1981.

SWISS, S & GILLER, J.E. "Rape as a Crime of War", JAMA, Vol 270, No 5,
1993.

THOMAS, D.Q. & RALPH, R.E. "Rape in War: challenging the tradition of
impunity" SAIS Review, Winter-Spring 1994, 81-99.

TUROK, M. "Women Political Prisoners", Paper presented to the Malibongwe
Conference, Amsterdam, 1989.

VAN WILLIGEN, L.H.M. "Women Refugees and Sexual Violence" Medisch Contact
(Netherlands Medical Journal), no 50, December 1984.

WALKER, C. Women and Resistance in South Africa Onyx Press, London, 1982.

ZWANE, P. "The Young Lions and the Sexual Face of Violence in the Black
Townships: the inheritance of the future government", Centre for the
Study of Violence and Reconciliation, 1994.


===========================================================================


