
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		08 APRIL 1997	

NAME	:	ALBERTINA NOMBOYSELA GOBIZEMBE

		PRETTY MKALIPI

CASE:		EC1904/97ALB		-	GRAHAMSTOWN

		EC1900/97			-	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 2

____________________________________________________________

REV XUNDU: Albertina Gobizembe, please stand up.

ALBERTINA NOMBOYSELA GOBIZEMBE: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you.

PRETTY MKALIPI: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you. Mr Chairperson, they have been properly sworn in.

CHAIRPERSON: Over to you Ntsiki Sandi.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairman. Let us start with Albertina Nomboysela
Gobizembe. Are you from Port Alfred?

MS GOBIZEMBE: I am from Bathurst.

ADV SANDI: You are going to tell us this incident. Where did it happen?

MS GOBIZEMBE: It happened in Port Alfred.

ADV SANDI: But you are from Bathurst?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: When did this incident happen?

MS GOBIZEMBE: It was in 1985, if I am not mistaken, it was in June.

ADV SANDI: In your statement you have also stated that it was in June
1985. You said that at the time of this incident you were a member of a
certain organisation.

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: What was the name of the organisation?

MS GOBIZEMBE: It was AZAPO.

ADV SANDI: You said that you were attacked?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, I was attacked.

ADV SANDI: Please explain to us how were you attacked, what happened on
that day?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, I can explain. Certain Comrades came to Bathurst. At
that time there was no organisation in that area. These Comrades formed
AZAPO in our area, people joined AZAPO in Bathurst. If I am not mistaken
it was on a Sunday. Certain Comrades were arrested, but they were not
from Bathurst, these Comrades they were the ones who came to launch this
organisation. They were taken to Port Alfred. There were three ladies,
three of us, this disturbed us. It was myself and Pretty together with
Titan Matiyasi, but she is not here. We visited these Comrades, we had
food, we brought them food. If I am not mistaken, when we arrived there
they were released, they were in the township. We wanted to go to the
township to visit them there so that we can find out what happened.

	We went to the township on Sunday, where we arrived there and they
explained to us what happened to them when they were arrested. It was
late at that time and there was no transport for us to go back. There
were no taxis at that time. We stayed there, we discussed together with
the Comrades. While we were still discussing there we got a message that
there was a meeting in the hall. The community from the township were
invited to that meeting. We also decided to join this meeting. We went to
attend the meeting. It was opened with a prayer. The, we were told about
the agenda.

ADV SANDI: Are you talking about the meeting in which you were attacked
in?

MS GOBIZEMBE: No. We knew that we were going to be attacked. We heard
from that meeting. One person told us to leave that meeting, because we
were going to be attacked. We left the meeting. We went to one house.
This, the owner was a member of our organisation. We went in one room in
this house. We were about 20, we were not more than 20.

ADV SANDI: All of you, were you members of AZAPO?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, we were all members of AZAPO. We stayed in that room.
We were discussing our issues. At night we heard that there were people
outside the house, some of them were on the roof. They were, some were
kicking the doors. We asked them what was wrong, we asked for
forgiveness, because we did not know what we have done. They assaulted
us, they beat us, we tried to go through the windows. When I was trying
to get out of the window something struck me in the head, I fell down. I
do not know whether they thought that I was dead, but they just left me.
I could not walk because I was injured in my leg. I crawled and I managed
to go to one house and I walked with one leg to the door of this house.
There was, it was dark at that time, there were no lights in Port Alfred.
I went inside this house. When I got in I heard someone crying, it was
Pretty.

ADV SANDI: Take your time Ms Gobizembe. I will wait for you.

MS GOBIZEMBE: I went to another room. There was a man sleeping in that
room. He asked me what was going on. I could not answer him because I was
feeling pain in my back, I could not even breathe. I hid under the bed.
One lady came, she told me to hide under the bed. She told me to hide
under the bed. After a while she came back and she took me out. She took
some, she took something and she wiped my face and she also bandaged my
leg. While I was still sitting there we heard that there were many people
coming towards this house. Again this lady took me under the bed. They
came and they knocked in the door. They asked whether there was someone
in the house. This lady said there was no one. They then said if there is
someone in this house, you are going to be burnt. I just talked to
myself, I was praying that the lady would not tell them.

	They searched the whole house, they looked under the bed, but they did
not see me, although they had torches with them. This lady came and she
took me out of the bed again. There was a knock. It was a girl who was a
member of our organisation, together with the third one. They gave me a
stick and I thanked the lady for saving my life. I told her that I was
going back home, because if they found me there, they will burn this
house. ADV SANDI: Did they take you to hospital?

MS GOBIZEMBE: No, they did not take me to hospital. We tried to go back
home. When we were about a corner, we saw that there were flames. We did
not know what to do at that time. We did not realise that we were walking
through the site where we were going to reach these flames, but we found
out that our two Comrades were being burnt down.

ADV SANDI: Who were these Comrades?

MS GOBIZEMBE: It was Kolani Anton from Grahamstown and Thembisele, he is
also from Grahamstown, but I have forgotten his surname.

ADV SANDI: Is it Thembisele Mata?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes. We passed this fire, we went back home. When I was
near the Malandela farm we decided to sleep there.

ADV SANDI: Who was with you?

MS GOBIZEMBE: It was myself, Pumla from Port Alfred and Titi from
Bathurst.

ADV SANDI: Where was Pretty at this time?

MS GOBIZEMBE: I last saw Pretty when she was taken out of the wardrobe.

ADV SANDI: She was not with you at this time?

MS GOBIZEMBE: No, I did not know where she was at this time. We woke up
in that place in the morning. The man of the, the owner of the house said
that he was going to go to the farmer and lie and say that I was sister.
When we were going back home we met an ambulance that and it took us to
the hospital.

ADV SANDI: Who were these people who assaulted you?

MS GOBIZEMBE: We did not know who they were, because it was dark when
they came in, the lights went off. We could not see who they were.

ADV SANDI: Were there rumours, did you hear any rumours about this?

MS GOBIZEMBE: No, I did not know who these people were, but I can just
say that they are people from Port Alfred, because they belonged to UDF,
they did not like AZAPO.

ADV SANDI: Did you get treatment from the hospital after you were injured?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, we were taken to the hospital and we were operated.

ADV SANDI: In which hospital?

MS GOBIZEMBE: In Settlers Hospital.

ADV SANDI: When did, for how long did you stay?

MS GOBIZEMBE: We were just operated and then given pills, we then went
back home.

ADV SANDI: Did you get any other treatment after that?

MS GOBIZEMBE: There was a need for a treatment, because our wounds were
not cleaned, we were just operated. I could not walk properly. I just
consulted a traditional healer to help me.

ADV SANDI: Do you have requests or expectations to the Commission?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Can you please tell us briefly?

MS GOBIZEMBE: My request to the Commission is that I am not feeling well
in my health, because I was injured in that incident, especially in my
leg and in my body. I am not feeling well, I cannot do everything for
myself.

ADV SANDI: Do you go to hospital or do you go to a doctor?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, I do go to a clinic sometimes. When I feel pain I go
to a clinic. They will give me rubbing stuff and some pills, but I can
feel that my body is not well.

ADV SANDI: Is there anything else you want to say?

MS GOBIZEMBE: I have another request to the Commission. I made this
request before that I would be very glad if we can get a tombstone for
our late Comrades so that if we remember them we can go to their graves.

ADV SANDI: When you are referring to your late Comrades, are you
referring to the two you have mentioned or are there any other Comrades
who died this way?

MS GOBIZEMBE: No, there are no other Comrades, I am referring to the two
I have mentioned.

ADV SANDI: Then we are going to hand over to Pretty. Is that all you
wanted to say?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, that is all.

ADV SANDI: Thank you very much. Let us now go to Pretty Mkalipi. Are you
Pretty Mkalipi?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, I am Pretty Mkalipi.

ADV SANDI: You have heard when Ms Gobizembe explained what happened this
day. Were you present when this was happening?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, I was there.

ADV SANDI: Without repeating what she has already said, do you have
anything else to add?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, I do have something to add according to my injuries. She
left me, I was taken by these Comrades. They said that they were going to
burn me. Four people came and saved me, four young men came. They said
that I was too young to be burnt. They pleaded for me and they said that
I was a young girl. These people from Port Alfred, they did not want to
listen, they wanted to burn me.

ADV SANDI: The people who wanted to burn you, did they say they were
Comrades?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, they were Comrades belonging to UDF.

ADV SANDI: Did you know them?

MS MKALIPI: No, I did not know them. I did not notice them, because it
was dark.

ADV SANDI: Did they take you to the place where they wanted to burn you?

MS MKALIPI: No, they did not take me, because the four men pleaded for my
life. As a result, the others gave up.

ADV SANDI: Why did they want to burn you?

MS MKALIPI: The said that why am I a member of this organisation.

ADV SANDI: Did they tell you in which organisation they belonged to?

MS MKALIPI: No, but it was clear in which organisation they belonged to.

ADV SANDI: Let us now talk about the injuries you sustained when you were
attacked.

MS MKALIPI: I was axed in the head five times. I also have wounds in my
leg. They also beat me with sjamboks in my body. I have five wounds in my
head and in my leg and they beat me all over the body with sticks and
sjamboks. They were beating me while I was lying down.

ADV SANDI: Were you taken to the hospital or to a doctor?

MS MKALIPI: I was taken to Settlers Hospital here in Grahamstown. We were
just operated, they were told that the, people told us there that they
did not have time for us, there were many people to be attended to.

ADV SANDI: Was it yourself and Ms Gobizembe at the time?

MS MKALIPI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Do you receive treatment now because of the injuries you
sustained?

MS MKALIPI: I use to go to the clinic to be bandaged and I also consulted
a traditional healer, because my eyes were swollen.

ADV SANDI: Is there a need for you to get treatment today?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, I would like to be checked properly in my head, because
I get dizzy sometimes and sometimes I just get moody, I do not want to be
with people.

ADV SANDI: Do you have requests to the Commission today?

MS MKALIPI: My request is that I would like the people who did this to us
to come forward to the Commission.

ADV SANDI: If they can come forward to the Commission and apologise to
you for what they did to you, what would you say to them?

MS MKALIPI: I would forgive them if they can come forward. I will be
satisfied, because I do not know who did this to me. If I knew the people
who did these things to me, I would be satisfied.

ADV SANDI: Your request is that you want to know who they are?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, that is all.

ADV SANDI: Do you have anything else? What are you doing now, are you
working or are you a student?

MS MKALIPI: No, I am not a student, I am not working. I stopped school
after I got injured.

ADV SANDI: When did you stop school?

MS MKALIPI: It was in, I was in standard seven. I went back to school
when I was better, but I stopped, because when I am at school I get
frequent headaches, I do not concentrate to what the teachers are saying
at school.

ADV SANDI: At the time you were attacked, how old were you?

MS MKALIPI: I was 15 years old.

ADV SANDI: Were you a member of this organisation?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, but we had no membership card at the time.

ADV SANDI: You just joined the organisation?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, because the organisation was just formed in Bathurst.

ADV SANDI: Who was the Chairperson of this organisation?

MS MKALIPI: It was Speedo Kali together with Wanga Ntantiso. The person
who was coming from Grahamstown to Bathurst was Tima.

ADV SANDI: Who was the National President of this organisation?

MS MKALIPI: It was Tima from Grahamstown.

ADV SANDI: I mean nationally.

MS MKALIPI: I do not remember who was the President.

ADV SANDI: Did you know any national leaders of AZAPO at the time?

MS MKALIPI: I only knew the local leaders, I did not know the national
leaders.

ADV SANDI: Is that all you wanted to say?

MS MKALIPI: Yes, that is all.

ADV SANDI: Thank you. I will hand over to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Reverend Xundu.

REV XUNDU: I have a question for you Pretty Mkalipi. You mean that you do
not have chances to go back to school because of your health?

MS MKALIPI: I am not saying there are no chances, but for now I do not
feel like going back to school, but I would like to further my education.

REV XUNDU: Would you like to be helped to go to doctors so that you can
feel well?

MS MKALIPI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Do you still have parents?

MS MKALIPI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Are they working?

MS MKALIPI: My mother is not working, my father is employed.

REV XUNDU: Thank you. I just wanted to make sure about this matter.

CHAIRPERSON: In this conflict between UDF and AZAPO were there victims on
both sides or victims were just on the AZAPO side? Were there any UDF
members who died during that time?

MS MKALIPI: No, it was just this one side.

CHAIRPERSON: Because you wanted a place where the victims can be
remembered, I want, I just want to know whether the victims were supposed
to be separated or are supposed to be put together.

MS MKALIPI: I request the victims to be placed together.

CHAIRPERSON: How old were you at the time of the incident?

MS MKALIPI: I was very young, I was about to reach 15 years old.

CHAIRPERSON: Ntsiki Sandi.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairman. Let us ask Ms Gobizembe. For how long,
at this time, did you join this organisation?

MS GOBIZEMBE: This organisation was just formed, it was from January to
June.

ADV SANDI: Did you join in Bathurst?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, I joined this organisation in Bathurst.

ADV SANDI: Who was the Chairperson of this organisation in the Eastern
Cape?

MS GOBIZEMBE: I have forgotten his name.

ADV SANDI: Did you hear about any other leaders, national leaders, of
this organisation?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes, but I do not remember whether they were in
Johannesburg, but one of them was Makina. I just heard about him at that
time. There is another one who use to visit us from Johannesburg, but I
do not remember his name.

ADV SANDI: Was he known as the leader of this organisation?

MS GOBIZEMBE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: If you can tell us, very briefly, at the time when this
organisation was launched, what was the policy of this organisation?

MS GOBIZEMBE: We were told that the purpose of forming this organisation
was to fight for black people to be liberated, because the Government was
oppressing us. The organisation was said to like peace, because we did
not know anything, there was no organisation in Bathurst, we joined this
organisation.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Ms Gobizembe. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank both of you. We remember this time, the conflict
between AZAPO and UDF. There are many statements we received concerning
this era. There are conflicting ideas in these different statements, but
what we are looking at is that you are victims, you are women and you
were harassed. This is what is important to us more than a conflict that
was between UDF and AZAPO or whether, who was working with who in
working, in collaborating with the police. We are not concentrating on
that now. We noted your request that the people who did this to you are
amongst your community, you would like them to come forward so that they
can apologise to you. If it is possible we would like peace to prevail
amongst you.

	We would like the police at the door, if it is possible, if they can see
that a person is not, a person is drunk, he is not supposed to come in,
but if he managed to come inside, the police should be at the door all
the time so that such an event will never happen again.

	Thank you very much. You may go back to your seats.

	------------------------------

