
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 24-09-1996		NAME:	ROGERS GQEME

CASE: DUNCAN VILLAGE

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:	These three victims are going to give us additional
information that is also connected to the Duncan Village massacre. I'm
going to ask Revd Xundu to swear them in and also to lead them on behalf
of the Commission.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Chairperson. Rogers Gqeme, I would like to swear
you in, could you rise?

ROGERS GQEME:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. The next to be sworn in is going to be Nomonde
Mahlanza.

NOMONDE MAHLANZA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Mzwakhe Mvubu.

MZWAKHE MVUBU:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Rogers Gqeme, you are going to be the first person
who we are going to listen to.

REVD FINCA:	There is some noise outside which is a disturbance to us, so
I suggest we adjourn and to come back at eleven o'clock, thank you.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Thank you Chairperson. Rogers, could you come
closer to the microphone. What is your claim name Rogers?

R GQEME:	My claim name is Mtandi.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Let us take it easy. Now you say you were shot by
the police, could you tell us in full what was happening on that day?

R GQEME:	We were in the Roman Catholic Church where there

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			R GQEME

was a meeting of the youth.

REVD XUNDU:	What kind of a meeting was this?

R GQEME:	It was a meeting for the youth.

REVD XUNDU:	And what happened?

R GQEME:	These White people came in a casper and parked outside and sent
someone, a tall man who looked like a Coloured person, and was dressed
like a Minister of religion.

REVD XUNDU:	And what did he say to you?

R GQEME:	He asked, he said that we were asked to go out of this hall and
to disperse by order.

REVD XUNDU:		Did you go away?

R GQEME:	No, we didn't. The house, the room was full and people were
chanting freedom songs and some people did not hear what this man was
saying.

REVD XUNDU:	Then, did you ultimately leave the hall?

R GQEME:	This White person insisted that we should go out of the hall and
disperse and this took about 15 minutes and we went away as people who
were standing outside, since the hall was packed and we were in fear that
these Whites were going to shoot us.

REVD XUNDU:	As you were there, did you go as a crowd?

R GQEME:	Yes, we walked passed these Whites. Some of us walked down
Dendes Street and down Dunga Street and we joined the rest and the
bridge. Those - that was the crowd that was toyi-toying and we moved
towards Sipunzana.

REVD XUNDU:	Is this the time when this White person came?

R GQEME:	They followed us in their casper, leaving the people behind in
the hall, following the march.

REVD XUNDU:	So when you saw the caspers, did you run away and scatter?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			R GQEME

R GQEME:	No, we didn't, instead we proceeded and then these policemen
started shooting at us, but some of us who were not aware until we got
next to the cemetery and I could see people running away, people falling
and then as I was going up I could see a certain White man in a casper
and he called me, but I ran away and he shot me in the arm.

REVD XUNDU:	And after you were shot, you actually took you to hospital?

R GQEME:	I ran away and he again shot me on the waist and I fell facing
upwards and I asked him to pick me up. I struggled trying to stand,
though I was aware that I had been shot.

	Then I could see that I was injured and my legs were feeling very weak.
Then this White person came to me, handled me by the collar, pulled me
towards the casper and there were two of these caspers parked there and
he placed me just behind one of them.

REVD XUNDU:	Now, what ultimately happened. Did you end up landing in
hospital? At the end of all this struggle, did they take you to the
hospital?

R GQEME:	Yes. The police took me to hospital and they were assisted by
some people to take me onto the police truck which drove to the hospital.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you see any Doctor in the hospital? Did you get any
attention from any Doctor there in hospital?

R GQEME:	When I got to hospital I was driven into the OPD in a stretcher
and there was a White Doctor who looked at me and there was a big hole
here on my hip and he asked these White men why they had injured me so
severely.

	And these White persons laughed because they were young, very young.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			R GQEME

REVD XUNDU:	 I would like to ask a question. Do you perhaps know the name
of this Doctor who attended to you?

R GQEME:	No, I don't know his name.

REVD XUNDU:	But could you identify him if you were to see him?

R GQEME:	Yes, I think I could.

REVD XUNDU:	In your story I want to know was there any investigation
after this shooting or perhaps did you institute a claim or did you
perhaps get any compensation?

R GQEME:	No, I didn't do any of those. We didn't even make an attempt.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you working at the time?

R GQEME:	Yes, I was working at Westbank.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you able to work after this incident?

R GQEME:	Yes, I was working, but it was very difficult, because I still
have a bullet that is still embedded in my spine because they could not
take it out.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you perhaps go back to your old employers or did you have
to look for a new job?

R GQEME:	When I was discharged at the place where I used to work.

REVD XUNDU:	Did those people accept you back when you were discharged
from hospital?

R GQEME:	No, my employers discharged me as soon as I was released from
hospital.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you know the name of them? Do you know the name of the
factory?

R GQEME:	It is called the NCI Industry.

REVD XUNDU:	When you were discharged, did you perhaps get any grant?

R GQEME:	No.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			R GQEME

REVD XUNDU:	Do you still get medical treatment?

R GQEME:	No, I seldom go to hospital to get some medical treatment.	

REVD XUNDU:	Do you perhaps have any wish or any requests that you have to
say to this Commission?

R GQEME:	I wish this Commission could organise that I get medical
treatment.

REVD XUNDU:	And is there any other requests you have in addition to that?

R GQEME:	I also wish that this Commission could investigate about this
person who shot me.

REVD XUNDU:	Is there any other thing?

R GQEME:	I want to see this perpetrator face to face because I will never
forgive him, I just don't have peace.

REVD XUNDU:	Is that all you have to say or is there anything you would
like to say in addition to what you have said already?

R GQEME:	I also wish that this Commission could be of assistance to me
because I - my health is not good, I don't feel all right.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you, I hand you over to the Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	We thank you. We are now going to ask Nomonde Cynthia
Mahlanza to come forward.

REVD XUNDU:	I greet you Nomonde. What is your claim name by the way?

NC MAHLANZA:	My claim name is Nozulu.

REVD XUNDU:	Could you tell us your story and tell us what happened to you
on the 14th of August.

NC MAHLANZA:	I saw some White people coming into my house and they took
my brother away and they put him on the

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			NC MAHLANZA

casper and they left with him that afternoon.

	Then I asked my children that we should pray when he did not come back.
Early the following day a certain person came to tell us that my brother
had come and my brother was taken to hospital and as the Doctor was
examining my brother, my brother died.

REVD XUNDU:	Who is Mzwandile?

NC MAHLANZA:	Mzwandile is a boy who lives in our neighbourhood.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you perhaps know his name?

NC MAHLANZA:	Yes, I know his surname.

REVD XUNDU:	When you got to hospital, that is where he was certified dead?

NC MAHLANZA:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Was there any investigation about this death? His body - was
there any post-mortem that was done or any inquest that was done?

NC MAHLANZA:	No.

REVD XUNDU:	How old was your brother when he died?

NC MAHLANZA:	I don't know, but he was born in 1959. In fact the one that
died was born in 1964.

REVD XUNDU:	What is your request to this Commission?

NC MAHLANZA:	I'm asking that the Commission should help me because I have
three young children.

REVD XUNDU:	Whose children are these?

NC MAHLANZA:	No, they are my sister's children and they are dependent on
me.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you perhaps get any grant?

NC MAHLANZA:	Yes, I've just got this grant.

REVD XUNDU:	Is that all you have to say?

NC MAHLANZA:	Yes.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			NC MAHLANZA

REVD FINCA:	Tiny Maya.	

MS MAYA:	Ms Mahlanza, I would like to ask you some questions. You say
there was some SADF soldiers who came to collect your brother. Do you
perhaps know who these soldiers were? Is there any other person who saw
this?

NC MAHLANZA:	Yes, there are many people, because it was in the afternoon.

MS MAYA:	So you last saw your brother when these soldiers came to fetch
him?

NC MAHLANZA:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	And the last time you heard, was that he was injured? Is there
any person who told you the extend of the injuries or what had happened
to him?

NC MAHLANZA:	No, I don't know, but I think they assaulted him.

MS MAYA:	What did Mzwandile say - he met your brother?

NC MAHLANZA:	He said he met him somewhere crawling.

MS MAYA:	According to what you know, was he still in a position to speak
at the time?

NC MAHLANZA:	I don't know.

MS MAYA:	In our statement here you say he died from assault and from
kicking. Where did you get all this information?

NC MAHLANZA:	They got this information from me.

MS MAYA:	Yes.

NC MAHLANZA:	I was assuming that they had assaulted him and kicked him.

MS MAYA:	Was there any eyewitness that actually saw when they were
hitting him?

NC MAHLANZA:	No there wasn't none.

MS MAYA:	Did he have any children?

NC MAHLANZA:	No, he did not have any children.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8			M MVUBU

MS MAYA:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	We are now going to ask Mzwakhe Mvubu. (tape ends)

M MVUBU:	(tape starts) ... and whilst I was at the bridge just nearby I
saw some White policemen and soldiers coming from one direction. There
was some other people in front of me.

REVD XUNDU:	Were these people, were this White persons dressed in uniform?

M MVUBU:	Yes, they were in caspers. I then saw one of the people in front
of me falling. I immediately ran away and I think that is when I was shot
and I fell.

	I lost consciousness, when I regained consciousness, I was in hospital.

REVD XUNDU:	How long were you there?

M MVUBU:	I was there for two months. And I had to go for some therapy for
my arm. The Doctor who was a Doctor Appavo, when I was discharged, I went
back to work, but I still felt pain on my head and I went to a Doctor for
an examination and I told him that I had some pain on my head.

	And he asked whether I had ever been injured, and I explained, so he
sent me for X-rays and he could determine that there were still some
bullets on my head which are still embedded right now.

REVD XUNDU:	Did they take you back at work?

M MVUBU:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	And so you worked for a while. How did you stop to work?

M MVUBU:	They accused me of stealing paint.

REVD XUNDU:	Yes?

M MVUBU:	They were selling paint and I gave some money to

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9			M MVUBU

a certain Coloured person but I was the one who were accused as having
stolen this paint and after all this is the paint that I had paid for.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you refer this matter to the Union and what did they say?

M MVUBU:	I did refer the matter to the Union and they asked me to appeal
to a court, but later on they said everything depended on my employers.
So when Mr Pinnock, the Director came, this White person - this employer
said they had discovered that I had paid the money, but they laid another
charge now that I had used some other empty tins and so they asked me to
leave my work, so I reported the matter to the Union.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you perhaps have children?

M MVUBU:	Yes, I have. My last baby is 34 days old.

REVD XUNDU:	Are you married?

M MVUBU:	Yes, I have a wife.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you have one wife?

M MVUBU:	Yes, I have one wife.

REVD XUNDU:	What standards are your children?

M MVUBU:	One is in standard two and another one is in sub A and then the
baby who's not - is still very young.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you perhaps get any grant?

M MVUBU:	No, I did not apply for one, but my wife gets some part-time
job. Unfortunately she got pregnant and she had to stop working. My
request to this Commission is that I cannot get employment full time,
because they always see that I have got a problem with my health and now
I see that I do not have a bright future.

	Therefor I request that this Commission should pay for my children's
education.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	10			M MVUBU

REVD XUNDU:	Is that all you have?

M MVUBU:	Yes. That is all I have.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Sandi?

M MVUBU:	Yes, I did go to lawyer Lalla and his secretary who was a Black
told me that I was late because after three months, they do not accept a
case.

MR SANDI:	At the time you went to Mr Lalla, how long was it after this
incident?

M MVUBU:	It was four months after the incident, because I spent two
months in hospital.

MR SANDI:		Did you again go back to Mr Lalla?

M MVUBU:	No.

MR SANDI:	Is there any other lawyer that you perhaps went to see?

M MVUBU:	No, there is none.

MR SANDI:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	We thank you Mr Gqeme, Ms Mahlanza and Mr Mvubu for your
evidence and testimony as given to the Commission.

	Mr Gqeme mentioned something which people may misconstrue when he said
when we were looking at him, he said he would like to see this people
face to face, referring to the perpetrators and he said that he hasn't
got peace with them.

	Though this may be taken by other people up otherwise, but it is sending
a message to the perpetrators of this atrocities that what they did to
the people should not be considered lightly.

	Though I see that they did not care what has been done by the Truth
Commission. They did not have a deep consideration of what they have
done. We therefor want to

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	11

send word to them that they should listen that peace and reconciliation
in this country, is solely dependent on them by them taking everything
serious.

	They have injured and shattered people's lives whereby people have got
to go on living with some bullets within their bodies and this is
something very serious.

	And we therefor wish that the people who are responsible for all this
should come forward on their own, so that this Commission should make
them see the people they did all these things to.

	If they do not come forward, there is just no possibility of
reconciliation. We therefor thank you for bringing forward your
testimony. We are going to look into all the things you have said to us.

	And I will therefore ask you to take your seats.

	--------------------



