
	1	K HENS

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 28.08.96			NAME: KHULULEKILE MATTHEW HENS

CASE: - UITENHAGE

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________CCHAIRPERSON:
Could we call forward the next witness, Khululekile Matthew Hens.

KHULULEKILE MATTHEW HENS: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Hens, we welcome you. We were supposed to have gotten
your evidence yesterday, and then we intended that we would get your
evidence in the morning, but we couldn't, and then, because you were not
there in the morning.

PANEL MEMBER: Let me greet you Mr Hens first, and whilst we are
summarising. When I read your story, and your pain, you complain that
there was an attempt to have you murdered, which if it could of
succeeded, you would have been one of those people mentioned as the late
people. Who shot you on this particular day?

MR HENS: I can't explain who shot me, because I went out of the house,
going to the shop, and then that is when I was shot, and then I lost
consciousness, up to the time when my parents came and I was in hospital.
That was two weeks thereafter the incident. That is when I regained
consciousness.

PANEL MEMBER: Did you say that this attack occurred on the 23 March 1985?

MR HENS: Yes.

PANEL MEMBER: What time of the day was it?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	K HENS

MR HENS: It was round about 8:00.

PANEL MEMBER: Was it dark?

MR HENS: Yes, it wasn't completely dark, but it was at sunset.

PANEL MEMBER: Did this incident occur at the time when a lot of people
were being killed here in Uitenhage?

MR HENS: Yes, day time they had killed Mr Kinikini, and then I was shot
that very same evening.

PANEL MEMBER: Were you staying in the same street as Mr Kinikini?

MR HENS: No, he lived in Mabanhle and I live in Insa.

PANEL MEMBER: The day Mr Kinikini was murdered, you went out of your
home, and it was a sunset, and you were going to the shot, is it like
that?

MR HENS: Yes, it is so.

PANEL MEMBER: And on your way, getting to the shop, you heard some gun
shots?

MR HENS: Yes, it is like that.

PANEL MEMBER: Were they coming from far, or were these people shooting
nearby?

MR HENS: One other fact is that as I was crossing towards the shop, and I
was walking on the left hand side, the policemen were able to hide, so I
did not actually see them. They were hiding since they were the people
who were shooting.

PANEL MEMBER: So, where were you shot?

MR HENS: I was shot on the head.

PANEL MEMBER: Did you get any medical treatment?

MR HENS: I was in Port Elizabeth, in a hospital and then taken to jail,
and then I was taken to consult some doctors and specialists in Port
Elizabeth, and these specialists

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	K HENS

told me that this bullet could not be extracted, because it was next to
the brain. If they were to operate, I would run mad, or I would die, and
then I decided that they should leave it as it was.

PANEL MEMBER: In all, you say as you are sitting here now, this bullet is
still here in your head?

MR HENS: Yes.

PANEL MEMBERS: Are there any other people after you had been shot, whom
you heard were also killed in that very area where you had been shot?

MR HENS: At the time I was sent to hospital, I couldn't see clearly, I
couldn't see the people, I would just hear voices.

PANEL MEMBER: Did you perhaps hear that there were some other people who
may have been shot at this very same scene where you had been shot, or at
the very same time you were shot?

MR HENS: I didn't hear anything, perhaps there could have been some
people who had been shot.

PANEL MEMBER: Did you ever go to a lawyer to go and brief any lawyer?

MR HENS: In my statement I did not mention that because what happened
when I was released from jail, that was the time when these lawyers of
the struggle were in one church and at the time, I could not see and my
father was supporting me.

PANEL MEMBER: Did you appear before any court after you had been shot,
and what was the allegation?

MR HENS: When I was in hospital, for about two weeks, and on a Friday, I
was taken by the police from the hospital and they were saying that they
were taking me to Bongwana to

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	K HENS

work because they said that I was going to get a salary and they would
take me home. Then they put me in the police van to go and lock me up
instead. I gained consciousness when they were saying, he is one of them,
and they were saying this in Afrikaans. When I regained consciousness, I
was in jail.

PANEL MEMBER: What was the allegation that was laid to you in court?

MR HENS: I couldn't see, and then there was one boy from the location who
had been shot, and this is the boy who gave me support whilst we were
getting to court. I heard a question that was asked by the court as to
whether I used to see properly before. I told them yes, I used to see
properly but I wouldn't be able to see clearly, so some other people took
me back home.

PANEL MEMBER: Were there other people in this court who appeared and who
were accused with the same allegation?

MR HENS: There were some other people who appeared in court, but this boy
had been arrested as one of the people who were in a toyi toyi.

PANEL MEMBER: Are you perhaps getting any medical treatment from any
doctor?

MR HENS: There is, I get it from the clinic, even this morning I had to
go and get the medical treatment from the clinic but I could not do so.
That is the reason I was late in the morning, it is because I had to go
to the clinic to collect my treatment and I therefore had to rush.

PANEL MEMBER: What do the doctors say these tablets are for?

MR HENS: They are for my fits because I have this bullet which led me to
have these fits.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	5	K HENS

	I have three children, and I used to work, so from 1995 up till now,
which is 11 years now, I am unemployed, but when I consider that if I had
not been shot, I would be far by now.

PANEL MEMBER: Do you get any disability grand because you cannot work?

MR HENS: I did go to the social workers, and I got the disability grant.

PANEL MEMBER: Now, according to your statement, you have a request, the
only request you have, you say you want to know who the people are who
shot you?

MR HENS: Yes, I would be delighted to know who shot me.

PANEL MEMBER: Is there any other requests you have?

MR HENS: In addition, the fact that I have this bullet in my head, I am
useless, I am like a dead person. My request is that if these people had
not shot me, I would have been able to build a home for my children, so
as to leave them with a home, even if I were to die.

PANEL MEMBER: Is that all you have to say?

MR HENS: I am asking this Truth Commission to help me with these problems
I have.

PANEL MEMBER: Thank you for your co-operation Mr Hens, I will hand over
to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We are going to consider your requests as presented to this
Commission. We are going to help where we can, as you know that some of
these things have got to be forwarded to the State President of this
country together with his cabinet. Could you go back to your seat, and we
thank you.

-----------------------





