Independent Newspapers' Submission to the TRC



Independent Newspapers' Submission to the TRC

Section 1: Executive summary

Section 2: Source list; brief, scope of the inquiry; historical context;
the company culture

Section 3: Inhibitions on functioning as a fully democratic press

Section 4: Victims of apartheid

Section 5: Efforts to fight government-imposed restrictions

Section 6: Different agendas

Section 7: The great divide

Section 8: Collusion with apartheid

Section 9: Conclusions

Independent Newspapers' website - www.inc.co.za




===========================================================================





Section 1: Executive Summary


a) Where the company failed in the human rights field

* The commercial nature of the company limited its political role in
exposing apartheid abuses.

* Because of a concentration on white political rivalries, black
political aspirations and the doings of the liberation movements were
insufficiently covered by the company's newspapers.

* Insufficient effort was made to circumvent restrictions imposed by
apartheid and other legislation.

* Recruitment of black staff began too late, proceeded too slowly. This
was discriminatory.

* White perceptions monopolised news judgements on most of the company's
papers. On black newspapers in the group, the reverse applied.

* The contribution of black editorial staff was not recognised and
rewarded timeously.

* The Press Council, recognised by the company, was established to
prevent government control of the press, but it was unrepresentative of
the population.

* Liberal and liberationist journalists followed different agendas and
pursued clashing goals. The company failed to resolve this dilemma.

* The company's gradualist anti-apartheid editorial policies caused
perceptions of collusion with apartheid.

* The growth of the alternative press showed the company had to some
extent lost touch with the oppressed masses.

* In a climate of intensive State propaganda, contacts with liberation
movements were insufficient.

* Petty apartheid was practised on company premises. Opposition could
have been stronger.

* Discriminatory practises were followed in reporting accidents and crime.

* Black editors were in some cases treated paternalistically. Some black
staff were paid less with worse facilities.

* The company's handling of the strike at Post Transvaal was insensitive,
causing bitterness.

* Insufficient efforts were made by the company to provide proper
training for black staff.

b) The company and its staff as victims of human rights abuses under
apartheid

* Restrictive legislation and regulations interfered with the watchdog
role of newspapers.

* Access to news sources was impeded by enforced segregation.

* Laws prevented black journalists from practising where white
journalists could, and vice versa.

* Journalists were harassed, intimidated, assaulted, detained, arrested
and prosecuted.

* Black and white staff attitudes were adversely affected by the racial
polarisation of apartheid society, and the intensification of the
struggle against apartheid.





Section 2: The brief; Source list; Scope of the inquiry; Historical
context; The company culture


Brief

To provide an independent and objective overview of the experience of
Independent Newspapers (previously the Argus Company) from 1960 to 1993,
the period covered by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission's
investigation into the media, with the aim of identifying areas in which
the company and its staff were either victims or perpetrators of human
rights abuses, or either directly or by default, played some part in
allowing human rights violations to occur.

Source list

Interviews with:

1) Michael Green, retired editor, Daily News, Durban

2) Ian Wyllie, retired editor, Sunday Tribune, Durban

3) Mostert van Schoor, Editor-in-Chief, Natal Newspapers, Durban

4) Dennis Pather, Editor, Daily News, Durban

5) Peter Sullivan, Editor-in-Chief, The Star, Johannesburg

6) Aggrey Klaaste, Editor-in-Chief, Sowetan, Johannesburg

7) Joe Latakgomo, former editor, Sowetan, Johannesburg

8) Andrew Drysdale, retired editor, The Argus, Cape Town

9) Jon Hobday, editor Saturday Argus and Sunday Argus, Cape Town

Others approached for interviews:

1) Thami Mazwai, editor, Enterprise magazine, and former managing editor,
Sowetan, who declined to answer questions until an assurance could be
given that this report would not be submitted to the Freedom of
Expression Institute. When that assurance was forthcoming, he did not
return calls.

2) Joe Thloloe, Editor-in-Chief, Television News, SABC, and former deputy
editor, Sowetan, who declined to answer questions because he did not
support corporate submissions to the TRC. If he wanted to make a
submission, he would do so himself.

3) Harvey Tyson, former Editor-in-Chief of The Star, who gave an
interview on a non-attributable basis while allowing himself to be quoted
from his book, "Editors under Fire". He made it clear that if the
commission required information about violations of human rights,
censorship within the media from him, he would be more than willing to
provide any information which the commission directly sought.

4) Wilf Nussey, retired editor, Pretoria News, who allowed his answers to
questions to be used on a non-attributable basis. He wants no further
involvement in the inquiry.

Conversations with:

1) Gordon Schwormstedt, legal adviser to The Cape Argus, Cape Town.

2) Anthony Sampson, former editor, Drum magazine, Johannesburg, member of
the editorial board of Independent Newspapers

Published articles referred to:

1) Mathatha Tsedu in The Star, January 7 1997

2) Jon Qwelane in the Saturday Star, January 11 1997

Scope of the inquiry

My investigation into the company's practices, and into its experiences
in projecting to the public the dark years of apartheid, is intended to
sketch in broad strokes the culture of its operations, its prevailing
philosophies, its problems and its failings during a crucial period of
the country's history.

This study has been made by a retired former editor, now outside the
company but with 38 years of service to the company embracing the whole
period of the TRC investigation.

At the express wish of Independent Newspapers, this report has been
commissioned as an independent study, not as a defence of the company.

It is a contribution to assist the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
its understanding of the Argus Group's (now Independent Newspapers') role.

Because it is an overview, no attempt has been made in this study to list
or comment in comprehensive detail on every one of the multiplicity of
incidents affecting all or some of its publications over this lengthy
period, though some examples are given.

The study does not preclude the company's management, any of its editors
(or former editors) or other employees from making their own submissions
to the TRC in connection with the inquiry.

Historical context

The Argus Company was started last century by home-language
English-speakers as a vehicle for information and advertising for their
own community and to represent the interests of that community in the
larger public life.

While it retained this character over the decades, its newspapers'
readerships and advertising bases expanded later into other communities,
first picking up support among Afrikaners and later spreading to include
substantial readerships among communities of colour.

While controlled for much of this period by leading mining group Anglo
American through its associated company JCI, the company came to
represent wider interests founded on support for free enterprise and the
upholding of liberal Western democratic values, including freedom of
speech, the rule of law and justice for all.

Even before the period of this study, South Africa was a country of
divided communities - divided by language, culture, way of life,
religion, economic involvement and level of wealth, education and
experience.

Division in communities was reinforced by a history of conflict,
prejudice, discrimination and exploitation.

In spite of these divisions and levels of hostility, which may have made
up part of the National Party's justification for the policies of
apartheid, economic forces were bringing those communities inexorably
together into a situation of mutual dependence.

Especially after the Second World War, with the rapid industrialisation
that took place, the prospect of separate futures for the different
communities became ever more impossible.

Though former Nationalist Prime Minister Dr Hendrik Verwoerd believed the
tide of black migration to the white urbanised and industrialised
enclaves would be reversed from 1978 onwards, it was apparent from long
before that date that no such reversal would occur.

Efforts at social engineering, designed to achieve separation of
communities, were eclipsed by economic forces.

Increasingly inhumane and ruthless moves by the apartheid government to
try to impose separation led to confrontation and long years of conflict,
finally resolved by all-inclusive negotiation when it became apparent
that conflict was tearing the country apart and would lead to irreparable
damage.

The company throughout this period opposed the apartheid policies of the
government, but was itself subject to the laws of the land.

Though editorial and management policies opposed apartheid, some of the
company's employees actually agreed with aspects of apartheid and
insisted on social separation between race groups on company premises.
This led to some internal friction, but eventually to relaxation of petty
apartheid restrictions, even before they were abolished from law.

As the level of conflict in SA society grew, so differences also emerged
among staff as to how to react to the conflict, though these did not
change the prevailing liberal policies being followed, except in the case
of black-orientated newspapers in the group.

Transformation of the company, from being dominated by home-language
English-speakers to being more representative of the wider community,
took stronger hold in the 1970s and, since the National Party's
abandonment of apartheid from 1990, has speeded up considerably in recent
years.

The company culture

One former editor of the company says of the company's character: "Going
back to the beginning, the fault lies in history - the fault as perceived
today, and everyone sees history in hindsight.

"The fault lies in the fact that we were almost exclusively white, male
WASP (white Anglo-Saxon Protestant), certainly Western-orientated. That
was our heritage, that was our system. That's where the newspapers
started. They started, just like all alternative newspapers start, with a
purpose, a political purpose, and their purpose was to put the views of
the English settlers at that time, I am talking about the English press,
and its audience was virtually male, white, English-speaking for a
hundred years, perhaps more than a hundred years. In the last 70 years,
they became commercial newspapers.

"Why were there no women editors? The simple reason was society dictated
it. There were no all-round woman journalists. It wasn't that the
newspapers kept them out. There weren't any trained in society. Women
didn't work that much. You were again a victim or a lax instrument of
history. And my answer on women editors was: because it takes 25 years
even to get into line for a major editorship.

"You can start your own newspaper if you want, but if you want to run one
of the big ones, it takes 25 years at least before you could be in line
for it, because it requires that amount of experience and seniority to be
put in charge. Not quite so today, but that was the formula of corporate
newspapers.

"So there is no doubt the accusation is true, if there is an accusation,
that we were always white male and our audience was white male, but for
the last 50 years, because of the weakness of the Afrikaans press, The
Star had more Afrikaans readers in the cities than the Transvaler, and
more black readers in the city than the Sowetan, and it had a higher
proportion of Indian and coloured readers than any other race group. So
the paper had a large audience, but its base remained the same. My own
view is that our newspapers, compared with any other institutions, were
way ahead in catering for other than sectional interests, both in content
and staffing.

"Thirty or 25 years ago when I was appointed an editor, the principles
were: you were not to pander to any sectional interest. It was the only
real briefing you had. These are basics. The next basic is this. The
accusation is that we are Western-orientated. It is absolutely natural
and I don't think it is anything to apologise for. It happens that the
Western liberal press is virtually the only free press in history and on
earth. There isn't any other.

"And the principles of the liberal Western press are ones that have moved
through to all other societies. We all aspire to those principles of
independence and freedom of expression. It is this very press which
reports criticisms of themselves. So I think, if there is an accusation
that we are liberal, that doesn't require defence. It is a fact of life.
And it is probably preferable to any other ideology."

What he said of women editors has applied with equal force to the
question why there were no black editors.

Saturday Argus and Sunday Argus editor Jon Hobday looks at another aspect
of the company culture: "My impression of the Argus Company was that it
was a very conservative company. It paid conservatively. It took to
innovation conservatively. It was a slow-moving company. To try to class
us in the category of pioneers and pace-setters is a mistake. It was not
the nature of the company. It was conservative economically, it was
conservative in every way. It was an establishment company run by
establishment people. And very successfully over the years. So it would
be wrong for us to claim to have set the pace.

"That is not to say we did nothing. We certainly made efforts, many
editors were very conscious of it, valiant efforts and quite successful
ones. I think many of the journalists you see around at the top of the
pile today came through, as white journalists did, through the Argus
Company mill and are what they are today because the Argus Company (now
Independent Newspapers) trained them."

Jon Hobday highlighted another feature of Argus Company culture, the
relationship between management and editors: "There was a definite
hands-off approach. Management was management and editorial was
editorial, and the twain did not meet. It was a clear line. If management
did feel constrained to contribute, it would be done in the most
circumspect civil, non-aggressive way. The concept and perception that
Oppenheimer phoned up and told editors what to write is absolute b...t.
That is the last thing in the world he would have done. He never did it.
I am not aware of any manager who ever delivered that kind of dictum, not
at all, ever.

"Managements were by nature conservative and sometimes were less than
defiant when it came to authority. Their instinct was to be good boys and
not to interfere with the business. It was left to editors to cause the
trouble. But I think, in fairness to Argus managements, there were some
brave managers. I mean Slater and Miller were principled men who stood
fairly sternly against apartheid. They understood what the political role
of a newspaper was. And they supported editors and let editors get on
with the job. And I don't know any editors who did not get on with that
job. But I must say managers were not political animals, generally."

Andrew Drysdale, retired editor of The Argus, gives this impression of
the company's stance: "Now if the suggestion is that we were party in any
way to the apartheid structures or the dictates of the National Party or
sympathetic to the National Party in any way, I would refute that in the
strongest terms. In fact, it would be a despicable accusation. Not only
would it be despicable, it would be totally untrue. I know of not a
single Argus/Independent newspaper which had to contend with the tyranny
of apartheid - and I use the word tyranny advisedly, because it was a
tyranny - not a single title that I am aware of supported the National
Party on a single issue that purported to strengthen apartheid or the
violation of human rights in any shape or form. I think we were all
committed to quite the reverse. In fact, none of us would have been
appointed to editorial chairs had we held views that were not contrary to
the views of apartheid.

"It is worth recording the mission statement of the Argus Company, which
is in black and white what the Argus Company stood for. Apart from the
desire to make reasonable profits, I think in the broader context the
mission statement recorded that 'we should try to place South Africa's
advancement and wellbeing before all else. To this end, to adhere to
independent, honest and responsible standards that do not pander to
personal or sectional interests, but are concerned solely with the public
interest. To further the cause of racial co-operation and to pursue a
balanced policy calculated to enhance the welfare and progress of all
sections of the population. Aim to avoid discrimination against any
members of the public or members of the Argus Company staff on the
grounds of race, colour, creed or sex, and to help staff who were
disadvantaged by observing the company's code of employment practice.

"Well, elements of that kind I would suggest fly in the face of any view
that we consorted with the apostles of apartheid. So I think that, if one
examines one's own role in these things over a long period of time - over
the decades - we strove as human beings and as journalists and as editors
to do the right thing by all the people of this country. And finally the
company will be judged by the record.

"The record lies within the bound volumes of our newspapers. The content
of those newspapers, the reporting of events based on what we knew at the
time and philosophically in terms of what we wrote in our editorials.
What it was we believed was right for the country and so on. So I think
the record must speak for itself and I don't think an apology is needed
and I would not apologise for the efforts we put in under conditions of
great travail, of enormous pressures, of great threats and anxiety and
anguish, which we all experienced personally, and that was also the
hardships endured by very brave staff throughout the country, brave and
very young people who were exposed to great danger, not only from the
state but from opponents of the state. Life-threatening situations many
times. I think that the courage of our journalists, far from being called
in question, ought to be commended, saluted."





Section 3: Inhibitions on functioning as a fully democratic press


Profits, readers, advertisers

The fact that at all times during the period reviewed here the company
was run as a profit-orientated business meant that commercial
considerations of what was possible economically coloured many judgements
of executives, both in management and editorial, when considering tricky
politically sensitive issues, where aggressive journalism in the cause of
justice and freedom could be threatened by government action against the
press.

The question often raised in editors' minds was: "How far do we dare to
go?" rather than simply deciding to publish something because it was news.

The needs of the newspapers' main customers - its readers and its
advertisers - played a significant role in the marketing of the group's
newspapers and required that it stay substantially in touch, and not out
of sympathy, with those customers, but not to the point of being dictated
to by them, being intimidated by them or meekly bowing to every pressure,
because the imperative to report the news of the day - whether good or
bad - remained throughout.

It was common knowledge within the company that the rival Rand Daily Mail
had been closed not only because of management failings but also because
it had lost touch with its advertisers.

Its readership had become increasingly black, but that rise in black
readership was not underpinned by advertising needed by those readers.

Traditional advertisers (especially of upmarket goods) found response to
their advertisements falling off, which discouraged them from continuing
to advertise through that medium.

What happened to the Rand Daily Mail was a warning to all other
newspapers in the commercial press, including all the papers in the Argus
Group.

Retired Daily News editor Michael Green spoke of editors' awareness of
these considerations: "Nobody from head office ever said: 'Please be
careful you understand the risks, we've got a valuable property etc.' To
be fair, you knew this. When you got appointed, you knew what your
responsibilities were. They didn't have to say to you: 'Don't go mad,
Don't make the newspaper bankrupt, don't drop the circulation by half.
Don't get it closed down and don't get yourself into jail. These are
elementary kind of things."

Another former editor, however, put an important additional editorial
perspective to this subject. He was asked whether he thought it was
sometimes necessary to push publication of the news of the day regardless
of whether this would damage the commercial side of the business. He
replied: "Yes. I think we were given that right, we were given that duty.
That was our role. Our role was spelt out. The manager and the editor
were equally responsible for the fate of the newspaper. The editor was
directly in charge of the content, the editorial policy and everything
else. And the manager was in charge of the commercial concerns of the
paper, and of course there were many examples of that, telling the
biggest advertiser in your paper to go and jump in the lake, to the
horror of management. Those things happened. So we perceived it, I
certainly did, as my duty to ignore the commercial consequences of most
of the political and other kind of reporting. I mean some of our bigger
pressures were not political. They were commercial."

He was asked whether he had experienced direct commercial pressure, not
through management. "Yes. It happens now. Rupert says he is going to
withdraw his ads. We had Checkers, they said they were going to take
R5-million worth of advertising away. I said: 'You do that. We would love
to report it. Would you like to put that in writing or shall I just quote
you?' He said: 'No, no, I'm not saying that.' We got direct pressure
quite often."

Apartheid laws

South Africa lived in a straitjacket of laws designed to force society to
conform with the separation of races as far as possible.While black
workers were allowed into industrialised areas, this was true only if
they could find work within 72 hours. They could join trade unions, but
the unions were not recognised (until the 1970s) so had little economic
clout in bargaining with managements. The townships were dormitories for
workers, out of bounds to everyone else. Education was separated by race,
so too were hospitals, sport, public transport, hotels, restaurants,
toilets. All this was enforced by officers of the law.

The Argus Group was on the white side of these official racial
barricades. Its access to news across the barricades was limited, often,
to official communiques and the complaints of objectors who came to the
papers with their troubles.

Life on the other side of the official barricades was not very
accessible, and much of it was not covered well because of the obstacles
placed in newspapers' way.

Jon Hobday, Saturday Argus and Sunday Argus editor, points to one of the
problems: "We should perhaps have recruited, done the process of getting
more people of colour into our newsrooms earlier. The fact is I can
recall recruitment beginning in the early 1970s, generally in association
to boosting soccer coverage. But you must remember black reporters
couldn't go anywhere. This was still apartheid. You could hire a black
reporter, but you couldn't send him to court. You could send him to a
soccer match, but you couldn't send him to court, because the magistrate
would throw him out. So there were practical problems."

And those problems extended beyond the courts to many, perhaps most,
activities affecting public life - the territory covered by newspapers.

Ian Wyllie, retired editor of the Sunday Tribune, recalls a clash with
the Administrator of Natal of the day: "Stoffel Botha phoned me up (we
were investigating allegations of fraud against him) and said: "I am the
Administrator of this province and you send an Indian reporter to me." I
said: "I sent a reporter to you." He said: "But he is an Indian
reporter." I said: "That's not relevant". He said: "What do you mean,
it's not relevant? I am the Administrator." He was doubly aggravated, not
only that we had got onto this very embarrassing fact about him (he
actually settled with the insurance company), but the outrage of this
man, because we used an Indian reporter. It was worse to face an Indian
than to have to face the questions."

Other laws

Besides laws relating to racial segregation, there were numerous other
laws making it difficult for newspapers to report what was going on in
the country, and in relation to the country, without relying on official
sources either for permission to publish or for information (very often
with the right to publish the other side denied).

The laws included limitations on reporting on police activities, Defence
Force activities, atomic energy matters, oil purchase and transportation
details, national key points, prison conditions, pre-trial detention of
prisoners and their appearances at court, even trade figures.

It was said that there were close to 100 acts on the statute book, apart
from measures normally inhibiting the media in a Western democratic state
(such as the laws of libel), that interfered with media rights to inform
the public.

Harassment of journalists

Reporters who ventured into covering the activities of people and
movements unpopular with the authorities were subjected to continual
harassment. Daily News editor Dennis Pather recalls: "Blacks courted more
police attention than white journalists. It was a fact of life. Black
journalists were more prone to arrest, house arrest or confiscation of
passport or restrictions in travel than most of the white journalists."

He was asked whether it was because of his colour or his activities, and
replied: "I think it was a bit of both. More because, especially the
special branch, read our by-lines and saw the kind of stories that you
tackled. It was more the reporters who reported on politics, on the
inequalities of that particular era who were targeted for special
attention. I would go and attend a meeting and on my way back it was not
unusual to be followed by plainclothes policemen and then be waved down
off the road, have all the things confiscated from my car, my notes,
whatever I had picked up from the meeting, and then they would help
themselves to it, only because they didn't have access to the meeting.It
was an easy way of harassing journalists and taking away their notebooks
and copies of reports and so on for their own information. There was
nothing I could do about it. That happened at least half a dozen times.

"And then also, I was then secretary of Mwasa (Media Workers' Association
of South Africa) in Natal, and on more than one occasion I was aroused in
the early hours of the morning and had the house searched. This was
especially so when the previous group to Mwasa was the Union of Black
Journalists, which was banned on October 19 1977. The police had also
visited the offices of the Daily News and went through our desks and took
whatever they wanted."

Sowetan editor-in-chief Aggrey Klaaste recalls what was behind the
government decision to close The World newspaper in 1977: "Jimmy Kruger
was the Minister of Justice and he was a nasty guy. And Percy (Qoboza,
editor of The World) had massive fights with him all the way. You
remember, too, Steve Biko was killed. There was a big staff, and we were
all angry. And Bophuthatswana got its independence and we were also
against that, you know. And then the thing which probably climaxed it all
was that we kind of formed the Committee of Ten in the office of The
World. We were kind of responsible." (The Committee of Ten was an
advisory group of prominent Soweto residents who tried to assist in the
running of the township after the Soweto riots)

Klaaste also spoke of the time the police wanted him to give evidence
against an activist: "Then of course the cops used to come into the
office. I almost got into very serious trouble when Mkwanazi (who went to
Robben Island) was arrested, because they wanted me to give evidence.
This is the time I actually ran, I ran for it. I went to Harvard on the
Nieman thing. I was actually escaping the clutches of the police.

"They wanted me to go and talk about this young man, and it was touch and
go, because I could have done so. I thought there was no reason to arrest
him. I thought he was just being a stupid fool and I was going to say
that.

"He had helped some people to escape across the border or something."

Question: And you wouldn't have been in a position to give evidence. You
would have said: "I won't give evidence."?

"Exactly. That was my problem. I had a very serious debate with myself. I
could go there and tell them that this guy is not a revolutionary at all,
but that wouldn't help my credibility. Anyway, even if I went and spoke
up for him ... I literally bolted. When I came back, he had been
sentenced, to 10 years. Can you imagine? I would have been in such a
mess. I would have been in a terrible mess. I would have been seen as
part of getting him that 10 years. Other than that, cops used to come in
to check on stories we wrote. I mean it was normal."

Question - It was a kind of intimidation? - "Absolutely.

All the time.

"Question - Did they just walk in? Or did they make appointments? - "No
they just walked in.

"There are many, many more examples of harassment that can be given, for
example, editors and their reporters threatened with prosecution under
Section 205 of the Criminal Procedure Act.

Harvey Tyson, whose book "Editors under Fire" makes up a far more
comprehensive account of newspapers' tussles with the apartheid
government than this document, wrote: "As an editor of a newspaper, I
must confess the '205' process certainly frightened me. It gives police
the power to demand that a person appear before a magistrate, in secret
if necessary and without legal representation, and reveal under oath his
or her sources of information. Ostensibly it is legislation aimed at
ensuring that citizens do their duty in furnishing the police with all
information needed to prosecute a crime ... in South Africa it was used
for other purposes as well. It could frighten witnesses into perjuring
themselves. It turned people into informers. Most of all, it was used
against journalists. If reporters went to interview certain people, the
police would want to know what was said at the meeting. They wanted press
photographers' pictures as evidence against protesters. They wanted,
especially, our sources of information. The '205' became a sinister
weapon, not only in hindering accurate reporting - but in preventing the
press from investigating allegations against the police.

"In a period of a fortnight in 1984, three editors in the Cape, Andrew
Drysdale of The Argus, Tony Heard of the Cape Times and Willem Beukes of
Die Burger were all summoned to 'talk - or else'. So were nine Transvaal
reporters of the Rand Daily Mail, The Star and the Sunday Express in that
same fortnight."

Tyson also mentions the severe effects of Clause 27 (b) of the Police
Act. Witnesses threatened by police, denied their stories, but confirmed
the stories to The Star, because they were faced with being forced to
give evidence under Section 27 (b) "Chris More summed up the dilemma of
black journalists: 'Our fate may as well be written today, the "necklace"
(burning tyre around the neck) or "three cents" (a petrol bomb) is what
we - and our entire families - can expect if we provide statements to the
police. The option we have, in fact, is no option. If we give statements,
we go all the way to court and give evidence - then the community will
exercise its retribution. If we refuse to make statements, we go to court
and then to jail.'"

Tyson records also how police used non-co-operation as a pressure on the
paper: At the beginning of 1977, the head of the security police, Mike
Geldenhuys, said he was breaking off relations with The Star.

The Star faced an almost total information embargo. The consequence was
to force reporters to rely on unofficial sources. From these cases, the
NPU liaison committee compiled a case that led to changes in the
police/press agreement, which Tyson says 'helped not at all'.

The Commissioner of Police, General Prinsloo, announced a total boycott
of The Star, because an editorial Tyson wrote suggested police had too
much power.

Former Sowetan editor Joe Latakgomo tells of another form of harassment
that was quite common: "Sometimes we got telephone calls, people telling
us what was happening. But we knew our telephones were being bugged. If
we got a call like that and published it, it could be somebody sitting in
security headquarters giving the impression he was from Tanzania or
Lusaka, giving you disinformation and you would end up publishing what
would eventually be untrue information and they would prove that you
published false information and therefore discredit you forever. So we
were very careful about that. Therefore it inhibited us in terms of what
we could publish. Of course, there was also the danger that once somebody
called you, I don't know the number of times that, while you were talking
to a contact, somebody would interrupt and in a very famous kind of way
would say: "Julle praat maar kak, man."

Question - This was the cops listening in?

- "Yes. He would lose it and probably suddenly regret having done this. I
don't know how many people have had that kind of experience, and I bet
you it will be hundreds of people. It was either arrogance about it or
they were particularly dumb."

Question - Or were they just trying to tell you your conversations were
being listened to? A hint?

- "Yes. So that was the kind of approach."

Question - You and your staff were you regarded as a whole bunch of
activists rather than a whole bunch of journalists?

- "Absolutely. Some people were more of targets because of their
political activism."

Former Sunday Tribune editor Ian Wyllie tells of one incident of
harassment: "We had, believe it or not, run a supplement on the opening
of Richards Bay harbour. Among other things we had got an aerial picture
of Richards Bay from the Richards Bay Publicity Association, which we
used on the front of the supplement, an aerial of the harbour area. I got
a telephone call from Natal Command 'advising you we are taking action
against you under the Key Points Act on grounds you have published a
photograph.' I said: 'It sounds quite serious.' He read me the section.
He was just purring. I said: 'It is going to be very interesting,
colonel. We'll see how we go on this.' He said: 'This picture shows that
this key point isn't adequately secured. We'll make a lot of this.' I
rang off.

"As I put the phone down, in walked my secretary, Joan Puttock, with a
telephone directory for the North Coast. I picked it up and it had a
beautiful front cover of exactly the same picture. I asked her to get me
Natal Command. I asked to speak to the colonel I had just spoken to. I
said: 'This is Ian Wyllie here. You will be interested to know I have
just got the Natal telephone directory for the North Coast and I am happy
to say that I shall be comfortable sharing the dock with Louis Rive, the
Postmaster General.' He said: 'What do you mean?' I said: 'Well, have you
seen the new Natal North Coast telephone directory?' - 'No.' I said:
'Well it's got exactly the same picture on it.' He said: 'Ah. Christ.' I
never heard another word."

This incident serves to show that harassment of newspapers was a
deliberate tactic of the authorities, in this case frustrated by the fact
that it would have meant having to prosecute a government official as
well.

Harassment of journalists, however, was not only a phenomenon of the
apartheid authorities.

There was, especially when the campaign was in progress to make the
townships ungovernable, in the second half of the 1980s, considerable
pressure on black journalists to conform to the wishes of those
organising the liberation struggle.

Covering atrocities like necklacings, the activities of the Winnie
Mandela soccer club, burning of schools and looting of shops and other
such matters were affected both by this form of intimidation and by black
journalists' putting commitment to the cause above objective
news-gathering.

The Star was visited by a delegation from a particular political pressure
group in Soweto and ordered not to send a certain reporter to any more of
its meetings.

When the group was told The Star made its own decisions on who it sent to
meetings, the group said they would then not take responsibility for the
safety of the reporter if he was sent again.

Though the delegation denied this was a threat, it was taken as a threat
and a way of intimidating the newspaper into reporting according to that
group's wishes.

During these township troubles, also, the newspaper had to deviate from
its normal journalistic practice of identifying its sources wherever
possible (a practice aimed at giving maximum credibility to reports).

Sources would no longer speak to the newspaper if they were to be
identified, because they didn't wish to be seen as part of a
revolutionary movement or were fearful of police action against them.

Journalists often deliberately did not ask the name of their sources, so
the police would be unable to extract names from them through "205"
prosecutions.

The system of not identifying sources had a major weakness in that it
could be abused by partisan journalists for presentation of propaganda as
news, without the necessary checks and balances being in position to
prevent that sort of reporting.

e) political developments

The way the struggle against apartheid escalated into violence in public
places raised the emotional climate immensely, and newspapers were not
immune from these emotions.

Most of the company's newspapers were on the white side of the political
divide, and though anti-apartheid in policy and philosophy, were
nevertheless targeted with white society by liberation struggle
strategies.

The result was, for a long time, increasing hostility also within the
newspapers to these strategies.

Actions which had the most negative effect were bombs placed in public
places like streets, shopping centres and fast-food outlets, with land
mines on country roads being equally strongly condemned as acts of
cowardly terrorism.

But other measures also raised anger in white society - the sport
boycott, sabotage of electricity supplies, the arms boycott, the oil
boycott, the disinvestment campaign, boycotts against shops in certain
towns etc.

While these were all reported on, and the company's culture required that
they be reported on factually and as objectively as possible, including
getting the views of "the other side", there is no doubt that the mood
among most white newspaper staffs was heavily against the liberation
struggle methods.

The sister of a member of the printing staff of the Pretoria News was
killed by the Church Street bomb in 1983, which added considerably to
emotional reaction within that newspaper.

Staff in the printing works and in the commercial departments were
overwhelmingly hostile to these strategies, but even in the journalist
newsrooms and sub-editors' rooms (where the strategies were understood
and where the culture of even-handedness was believed in individually as
a treasured principle to a greater extent than in other departments)
there was disgust and vehement disagreement expressed.

I can myself remember reporting a meeting of Prime Minister John Vorster
in the vast hall at the University of the Free State in Bloemfontein
during the late 1970s, where a journalist colleague (from The Friend, a
sister Argus Company publication sharing the company's liberal norms) got
so inspired by the Prime Minister's defiant rhetoric that he jumped to
his feet shouting ecstatic applause as the Nationalist audience gave
Vorster a standing ovation.

This incident seriously embarrassed the whole press corps attending the
meeting, because it had long been a practice among all journalists to
show their independence by avoiding participatory involvement in public
meetings.

Nevertheless, it showed something of the mood among many whites at the
time, a mood shared to some extent by whites on newspaper staffs.

This mood must have played some part in the fact that newspapers in the
group were generally lacking in good contacts among the liberation
movements.

Activists were often seen as "the enemy" (in fact, some members of staff
were called up for conscription duty to fight against the liberation
forces), and they in turn must have regarded reporters from these
mainstream newspapers as unsympathetic to their cause and therefore not
to be entrusted with sensitive information.

By the same token, black journalists who were becoming increasingly
common in newsrooms of the company, were staunchly supportive of
liberation struggle strategies, and many of the journalists were
activists in that cause.

This political polarisation within newsrooms actually caused very little
overt friction between staff members.

In spite of personal emotions, there was a mutual understanding of the
reasons for the different emotions involved.

But, where white journalists lacked enthusiasm for many liberation
struggle strategies and actions, and suffered from too few contacts, the
reverse was the case with black journalists. They were, perhaps through
the circumstances within the townships, even more emotionally partisan
than their white counterparts on the other side. Many of them were
actually involved actively in the struggle (whereas most white
journalists were consciously non-participants on any side). Some would
report only the atrocities of the police, not the atrocities against the
police. Some would use activist contacts, but ignored police as news
sources.

Sowetan editor Aggrey Klaaste recalls the mood among black journalists:
"In the 1970s the anger became very, very bad. The anger from the people."

Question - And you were affected by it yourself?

- "Of course, I mean I lived there. I lived with it. In 1976 I was doing
a course at The Star and I just heard the news (of the Soweto riots),
that this place was on fire. We all left whatever we were doing and
rushed into Soweto. The place was literally on fire. So we also joined
and burnt down ... I mean it was just like madness. Like the French
Revolution. Just burning down halls and stuff. For days on end it
happened."

f) staff failings

Although alignment of political views was to a minor extent a factor in
the approach to news coverage among journalists, perhaps the most
significant internal factor inhibiting the Argus Company newspapers from
telling the full story of what was going on in South Africa (across all
racial groups) - certainly in the years leading up to the Soweto riots in
1976, and in spite of the earlier warning signs from Sharpeville and the
sabotage campaigns of the initial armed struggle - was an inherited lack
of consciousness by whites of the full plight of blacks under apartheid
and a certain lack of interest on their part in finding out.

There was also a lack of commercial incentive to pursue certain black
interest subjects, because there was no advertising to back up the
editorial space for such stories, and low black readership to justify the
placing of such stories.

While government measures to enforce apartheid were fairly fully
reported, the drastic extent of the effect of these measures on the daily
lives of blacks was not vigorously pursued.

Instead, considerable effort was devoted to detailed reporting of the
activities and rivalries of the white community.

This was done at the expense of involving themselves as fully as they
might in the whole cross-racial scene.

White politics (hingeing as it did on what the white approach should be
to political rights for different population groups) was itself for a
long time a cause of considerable tension and emotional division, only
later giving way to the realisation that it was a sideshow compared with
the need to deal and negotiate directly with the majority population of
the country in a transfer of power to a full democracy.

While that was the generalised failing of white staffs, black staff
members were employed very late in the day (except on the black
newspapers) and were themselves seriously affected by being the victims
of oppressive apartheid policies.

It was only later that they emerged from the minor role of reporting
sport and crime in their own communities to becoming advocacy journalists
against apartheid.

They then went from incomplete involvement in the game of independent,
arms-length reporting, to enthusiastic participation in full-involvement
advocacy journalism for the liberation cause.

Latakgomo says: "I think we saw political development going through
various stages. There was that political lull after Sharpeville, and
newspapers like The World were literally thriving on sports, women and
wine coverage ... not political coverage at all. It was fairly neutral
kind of coverage. Whether that was by design or because of the climate of
the time, I don't know."

Interviewer's comment - The Nationalist government was very much on top
at that time.

- "Yes and there was that euphoria that they had overcome. If you
remember, there was capital flight after Sharpeveille. Then things
started getting better towards the end of the 1960s, even when Afrikaans
writers were beginning to question things. You will remember the
Sestigers. They were beginning to question things, question the policies
of apartheid, question the government. There wasn't the same kind of
keenness to push it on the black side, because resistance had been
crushed, literally, post-Sharpeville, so there wasn't much happening on
the news front then, but I think there was a new wave of black
consciousness following the American experience, people like Steve Biko
beginning to emerge at the black universities. Students were beginning to
assert themselves as people.

"There were major strikes around 1973. The biggest one was at Frame in
Natal. It was fairly interesting, because there was a feeling ... there
was a gap in soccer because of some administrative problems in the soccer
world. So there wasn't any soccer activity. People were beginning to say
the reason you are having these strikes is because there is no soccer.
Some publications were actually punting that view, when in fact people
were legitimately beginning to question whether they were being treated
fairly."

Klaaste remembers it this way: "The action started in 1974. If you
remember The World was a kind of a bit of a rag in those days, quite
frankly. I don't think we made any money. Percy Qoboza was the editor. I
am talking about the times from the independence of Mozambique in 1974.
The black journalists began to assume a position of relatively more
importance than heretofore. I mean in the past we used to do a lot of
crime and sports and stuff like that, but this time we were thrust into
the political milieu, also because of guys like Steve Biko coming to the
fore and all the black consciousness things. Then we formed the Union of
Black Journalists, if you remember, which was a time when you were black
before you were a journalist. Percy's editorship was very interesting
because of the bunch of interesting periods, because after 1974 came
1976, which was the Soweto thing. And then of course the black
journalists came..."





Section 4: Victims of apartheid


To a considerable extent, newspapers became victims of human rights
abuses in their own right - a different range of violations compared with
those in which activists were victims when being tortured and killed by
the police, or innocent by-standers were when they were "killed in the
cross-fire" during Defence Force cross-border raids or killed by
"third-force" operations on board a commuter train, or when innocent
by-standers were killed by liberationists' bombs, or when suspected
police informers were burnt to death by "necklaces".

Newspapers and their staffs were victims of human rights abuses in that
the media have a special place in a democratic society.

They are the fourth estate whose job it is to reflect events, to dig up
the truth about bad government, maladministration, crimes, abuses.

And in that extremely important function, the media in South Africa were
endlessly harried and obstructed by the Nationalist government from doing
their job.

This took the form of hiding relevant public information from the media,
actively obstructing the media in their efforts to get at the truth,
harassing and intimidating journalists and newspapers in numerous ways,
including the threat of prosecution, arresting and prosecuting individual
journalists, detaining journalists without trial, torturing them while in
detention, and closing down or suspending newspapers.

They suffered considerable harassment and intimidation also from
activists in the liberation struggle who didn't want their excesses
publicised or themselves identified as culprits.

Though a valiant fight was put up by sections of the press against these
measures, there can be no doubt whatever that press freedom was seriously
affected and seriously diminished - at times almost obliterated.

Tyson says in his book "Editors under Fire" that newspapers, in
countering restrictions against them, were "winning minor battles but
losing the war".

For a long time that was true, though other editors in the company have
also pointed out that the war was eventually won.

a) arrests and prosecutions

The most infamous of examples of journalists being arrested occurred on
October 19 1977, when editorial executives on the staff of The World were
detained and held without trial in Modderbee Prison on the Reef. Klaaste
was one of them. He recalls that he and editor Percy Qoboza were held.

He adds: "The others weren't detained that day, some of them were even
detained before that, but quite a few other guys. In 1977 that day The
World was banned, the government picked up a whole lot of people, over
100, you remember, the black leaders. We were there, and of course,
although it was very unhappy, it also made us pretty well known, because
of that."

They were detained for "six or seven months", as he recalls. "It was
terrible. We thought we were going to be out in a couple of weeks."

Conditions were not too bad within the prison. "We were a group together.
It wasn't too bad. We were not like Section 6 (of the Terrorism Act)
detainees. We were not tortured or anything. We were just kept there. We
didn't know why or for how long. By Christmas time, they started building
things and we thought we were going to be there for years. It was very
worrisome."

Question - Could your families visit you?

- "Yes they did. But getting a visit from the family was most traumatic,
because when they leave, you all start weeping. It was really terrible."
But, while that was the best known incident of arrest, there was another
that sent ripples through white society in 1974.

Retired Daily News editor Michael Green remembers it well: "I was the
deputy editor and (John) O'Malley (the editor) happened to be away that
day. At the time of the Frelimo victory in Mozambique, a pro-Frelimo
rally was organised, banned by the Minister of Justice, Jimmy Kruger, in
terms of the Riotous Assemblies Act. We had a report submitted to me for
approval to say that, in spite of the banning order, the meeting would go
on. The meeting was scheduled at Currie's Fountain near residential parts
of Durban. I knew the law did not allow us to advertise a banned meeting,
nevertheless I felt it was essential to inform the people of Durban, in
case of trouble or whatever, that the organisers intended to hold the
meeting. So a very carefully phrased report, without giving the time, was
published, saying the organisers intended to carry on with the meeting.

"The upshot was that O'Malley and I were arrested at a function we were
attending that night, kept in a police station until the early hours of
the morning, had to produce the original copy from the printing works. By
some strange chance, we found the last printer there. We were prosecuted
in terms of the Riotous Assemblies Act, were defended at great cost by
Sydney Kentridge and, after a trial that lasted intermittently for three
or four months, O'Malley was acquitted, because he wasn't in the office
that day, and I was cautioned and discharged."

Besides the most publicised of arrests of journalists, there were
numerous others. Klaaste says simply: "A lot of our guys got detained,
really. It was like half the staff was detained at some time."

The case of The Star's reporter, Harry Mashabela, is worth recording from
Tyson's book: "After the 1976 Soweto riots, he was on leave, but in the
newsroom when the police came for him. They simply took him away.
Somebody rushed into my office and told me 'they've got him under Section
Six' (of the Terrorism Act). I telephoned the lawyers."

He went on to write: "Harry's troubles came immediately. He was assaulted
even before he was officially admitted into custody. He was interrogated
in the detectives' office about a pamphlet bomb exploded in distant Cape
Town."

Then he quotes Mashabela telling what happened: " 'Where are the
pamphlets?' 'What pamphlets, sir? I don't . . .' He slapped me on the
side of the face and, as my spectacles flew off, followed with a stiff
punch to the chest. And, as I staggered back, Morsdood, standing on the
side, chopped me with a solid karate punch on the back of the neck. I
folded up instantly."

Tyson records: "Harry's neck was dislocated and the injury was with him
for years - almost as long as it took to try to get compensation from
Minister of Justice Jimmy Kruger."

It is unnecessary in this overview to mention every case of arrest,
detention or prosecution of journalists, but several of them are recorded
in Tyson's book.

Besides the detentions without prosecution, there were the "205" cases,
where prosecutions were most often threatened without materialising,
there was the prosecution of former Star editor John Jordi under the
Defence Act (the first such case), which eventually fizzled out with the
charges dropped.

He had published a report that Defence Minister Frans Erasmus was in
Lisbon and which repeated speculation that South Africa might be about to
purchase frigates from Portugal.

And there was the prosecution and conviction of Star reporter Patrick
Laurence in the 1970s under the Suppression of Communism Act.

He had, as a freelance contributor to the London Sunday paper, The
Observer, interviewed the banned and restricted PAC leader Robert Sobukwe.

His report, which he posted surreptitiously to a colleague in The Star's
London office, for on-passing to The Observer, was intercepted by the
security police, providing the evidence for the prosecution.

Laurence was also more than once the subject of "205" prosecutions.

b) threats, abuse and intimidation

There is hardly an editor or political journalist who has not at some
time during this apartheid period been pressured unduly, personally
intimidated or seriously threatened either for what he/she had written or
to coerce him/her into writing or publishing what was desired.

English press reporters covering Nationalist public meetings were
regularly subjected to crowd pressure, and were often made the targets of
audience derision by remarks from the platform speakers.

Black reporters in the township troubles of the 1980s were under heavy
pressure from activists to report as they required, with very real
threats of "necklacing" and burning of houses or harming families as the
punishment for defiance.

This was in addition to the intimidation and arrests they experienced
from the police.

Editors had numerous threatening telephone calls and letters. Wyllie
remembers a National Intelligence Service operative, Martin Dolincek,
making a pest of himself by just walking into the office at any time and
trying to pal up to reporters. He remembers, too, the veiled threats of a
man such as Duncan du Bois, later a right-wing Durban city councillor.

"He didn't actually threaten me, but he used to argue that I was putting
myself into a position - rather like Buthelezi does - where it would be
inevitable that the newspaper would burn down. Buthelezi says this kind
of action will lead to..."

Question - It was supposed to intimidate?

- "It was designed to tell me to stop. But it didn't matter, because your
judgement was from one story to the next. A lot of people don't
understand that newspapers don't operate on a long-term kind of plan.
We're dealing with the events of the day."

Klaaste, as reported above, mentioned the way the police often just
walked into the Sowetan office, an obvious intimidation. In addition, the
paper was caught in the middle of disputes and rivalries between black
political groups. The Sowetan was subjected to boycott action, because -
as Klaaste says - "we didn't support the formation of Cosatu. Then they
picked up the feeling that we were more PAC, black consciousness, than
ANC." So the Sowetan was punished with a boycott to persuade it to fall
in line.

One former editor says he was the target of many threats.

"I had a drawerful. I took my telephone, my home phone, out of the book,
because of filthy calls my wife had, threats. Yes, but I had a drawerful
of death threats. You didn't take them very seriously. You really didn't.
Some of them were Portuguese. I don't know what that was about, but the
Portuguese were always going to kill you. There were lots. I just used to
take them and stick them in a drawer. It wasn't a major worry. What do
you take seriously? You look at them and say this one could be more
serious than that one. You can tell the nutty ones. I don't see that as a
major pressure. I see it as part of the job. Also in this country, which
is emotionally extreme, so we got much more of it than most places in the
world."

Drysdale recalls an incident while he was still editor of the Pretoria
News in the 1970s: "At the time of the World Bowls Championship, the year
Watson won, we got up to a story. In Atteridgeville, there was woman's
bowling club that was formed, and the local authorities promised these
people that they would lay a bowling green. Well, the bowling green never
got beyond a kind of excavation. So we had a picture of all these women,
black women in white bowling clothes, standing inside the excavation. We
ran the story on the front page and we didn't make direct reference to
the World Bowling Championships, which was at that time. I've got to tell
you that night I had several threatening phone calls, of the kind that
said: "We know where you live."

"And in fact it was very easy to know, because my number was listed, as
was my address. 'We will get you, and we don't have to worry about
getting you, we will get your family. How could you possibly draw
attention to this thing while the World Bowls Championships were in
progress?' That was not funny. Things like that happened over the years.
During the emergencies, from white and black. I always kept my telephone
listed, because I always believed people should have access to me, until
later, after the threats became that heavy, I instructed the post office
to remove my address. So my name was there and my phone number was there,
but not my address. For myself I didn't worry unduly, but for my family I
worried. The kids would pick up the phone and get these heavy threats and
obscenities. We could do without that. It was mostly anonymous. That is
how those sort of people work. It was the old story. I always considered
myself to be a middle-of-the-road journalist. I insisted on balance as
far as one was able to. We reported accurately and objectively without
side, people could make up their own minds. I felt strongly about that. I
still do. The trouble about being in the middle of the road is you get
knocked down by traffic passing on both sides, so that is an
uncomfortable place to be. Some people call it fence-sitting. Not quite."

Even in the 1990s, when the transition to democracy was in process,
threats were common.

I can remember as editor of The Mercury, with a readership previously
accustomed to fairly conservative commentary, having a rebellion from
right-wing readers when I moved the policy of the paper to a liberal
stance. Besides numerous abusive letters, I also received an anonymous
call from a man who said "I know were you live. I know what car you
drive. I know which routes you take. We will get you or your family."

As I believed the country was coming out of this era of intimidation, I
did not have my telephone number removed from the directory, or my
address, and the upshot of that was that I often received calls deep into
the night from threatening and abusive callers.

One particular caller phoned repeatedly, well after midnight - at
intervals of about 15 minutes (just time enough to go back to sleep) -
and he kept up these calls two or three times a week for almost two
months.

A bullet was also fired into my office, ricocheting off the window frame
behind my desk and burying itself in the wall on the other side of the
room. If I had been at my desk at that moment, it would have gone through
my head. I never managed to establish whether this was a random attempt
to intimidate me, or whether my office had by chance been hit by a stray
bullet from a taxi war exchange of fire (which happened from time to time
at a taxi rank about 100 metres away).





Section 5: Efforts to fight government-imposed restrictions


The Nationalist government, for almost all of the period under review,
kept the press under constant threat of action being taken against it.
The Press Commission sat for many years investigating the press, so that
the editors of the time were kept in a constant state of having a Sword
of Damocles dangled over their heads. When the commission's work was
finished, and little action was taken, there was no cause for rejoicing,
because the warnings continued.

Prime Minister John Vorster repeatedly warned the press to "put its house
in order", and his Information Minister, Dr Connie Mulder, as often
claimed he "put a high premium on press freedom, but ..."

The pressure was kept up in the 1980s by Dr Stoffel Botha, with threats
of new press legislation, which was actually published but not enacted,
providing for a register of journalists, but it was later withdrawn.

Over all the years, the government - apart from threats - took no
legislative action against the press, but simply kept newspapers in
constant fear of measures being taken.

When it came to action, the government used such acts as the Terrorism
Act, the Criminal Procedure Act, the Defence Act, the Suppression of
Communism Act, the Riotous Assemblies Act and, of course, a series of
ever-tougher state of emergency regulations to force the critical press
into toning down its coverage or commentary.

a) Press council

Faced with this constant rumble of intimidation against the industry as a
whole, newspaper proprietors decided to take defensive action against
state intervention - voluntary steps some would have called it, but steps
actually taken under government duress in an attempt to diminish the
likelihood of further restrictive press legislation.

The electronic media were in the monopoly hands of the government, and
were used for heavy pro-government propaganda, so were unaffected by
these threats.

The Newspaper Press Union set up a Press Board of Reference, later called
the Press Council or the Media Council, to provide a body outside
government control that could discipline the press for any misdemeanours
that breached its press code.

The council did occasionally rap newspapers for breaches, but actually
received few serious complaints over the years.

This led to pressure from the government to ensure it had more teeth,
because the government remained dissatisfied with the tone of the press
in relation to its policies.

One slight benefit that did eventuate for the press was that signatories
to the Press Council were exempted from the controls contained in the
Publications Control Act.

Among editorial staffs, the Press Council was not well received. Though
it was accepted that it was better for the industry to regulate itself
than that the government should do so, it was also felt that the industry
was being forced under government pressure to do its dirty work for it.

I served on two Argus Group papers which were found guilty by the Press
Council of breaches of the code, and in each case the editor concerned,
though publishing the council's finding (as was required), also saw fit
to write an editorial attacking the council's ruling.

The council itself had all the failings of the old South Africa, being in
no way representative of the whole population or even of the newspaper
reading public among its public representatives and being represented
only by whites among its press representatives.

In latter years, editors from all groups became so dissatisfied with the
council that they no longer wished to recognise it (even though obliged
to do so by their managements).

It is now in the process of being replaced by an ombudsman and appeal
committee.

The Press Council, though formed as a counter to Nationalist government
pressure to contain anti-apartheid publicity, was itself an example of
unconscious discrimination against blacks, and something the industry
should be apologetic about.

b) Finding loopholes in the law, and breaking the law

The problem editors faced with so many laws affecting the press, and with
the emergency regulations, was a non-acceptance of these laws, for being
unfair and unjust. But the laws were there, and editors had to decide
what to do about them.

One former editor said: "In hindsight it is very easy to say: 'We defy
you.' It wasn't like that. I said more than once what a wonderful,
tempting thing it would be to say: 'I defy you.' Whether management
backed me or not, I would have had a major golden handshake, freedom and
fame, and a guaranteed job elsewhere. It is very tempting. The trick was
not to do that. The trick was to keep your newspaper going, so that you
could get the messages out. That was our job and our function."

Natal Newspapers editor-in-chief Mostert van Schoor, who edited the
Pretoria News during part of the emergency, said: "We tried to operate
within the law, but often we sought legal counsel on how far to go on the
interpretation of the law, and we became pretty expert at interpreting
the law ourselves. There was a time during the state of emergency when we
began avoiding taking legal opinion, because the lawyers were taking
decisions on the law that were more conservative than we wanted to take,
politically or editorially. We preferred our own interpretations, because
we found their interpretations restrictive."

Question - You were prepared to take a greater risk?

- "We were prepared to take a greater risk than our lawyers felt should
be taken. We were all cowed by the emergency regulations when they first
came out. You sat with the emergency regulations on your desk, but we
learnt how to get around them. We learnt what we could get away with and
we learnt to interpret them, and that lawyers' interpretations were too
restrictive. The sole purpose was to give as much information to the
public as possible. We were fully aware of the fact there were many areas
where we weren't getting sufficient information.

"There were times when we knew more than we could publish. It was a very
uncomfortable feeling, but our guiding principle was to publish as much
as we could without getting ourselves shut down."

Editor-in-chief of The Star, Peter Sullivan, who edited the Saturday Star
while Harvey Tyson was editor-in-chief, said Tyson always looked for
loopholes in the law, "all the time. He didn't necessarily put his life
on the line, but he put his career and his newspaper on the line, almost
daily. When I was there, we were breaking the law four times a day.
Harvey said: 'Keep it at around four times a day and don't move it up to
too many.' "

Sullivan also recounts how, when he was The Star's political
correspondent, he and Helen Suzman MP conspired to get something
published which parliamentary rules actually did not allow.

"Helen Suzman and I conspired against Parliament, and we were then
accused by Parliament. We had this letter from Neil Aggett (who died in
jail after being assaulted), and we weren't allowed to publish it. I said
to her: 'Well, read it into the record. I'll publish it for you.' She
said: 'They will scrap it from the record and they won't allow me to read
it.' So I said: 'Well, don't say it is from Neil Aggett then. Say: "I
have a letter from a prisoner" and then read the whole letter. And then
at the end, you say: "The prisoner who wrote that letter was Neil
Aggett."'

"Helen said she would do that, but they would then scrap it from the
record. So I said: 'Helen, I will put it into the second edition of The
Star.

It will be in the paper.' And, I mean, the way it happened...You could
not have written it better. At the end of the speech ... 'I saw the man
being beaten...' and she said the person was Neil Aggett. Up jumped the
Nats and said: 'We object. That matter is sub judice.' Then in walked the
messengers with copies of The Argus with the headline. It went to P W
Botha. It was a speech she had finished making ten seconds before. I said
clearly it now doesn't help to take it out of the records of Parliament.
The Speaker started the next morning to say it grieved him to say the
honourable member for Houghton, an honoured member of this establishment,
'appears to have conspired against the wishes of Parliament'. I think we
did those kind of things every day."

One former editor said in an interview recently: "It would be very
comfortable to dodge taxes because your taxes were paying for tanks.
Again it comes to principles, which laws do you break? Once you have
broken the law, where do you stand in terms of your own principles? I
personally wrestled with that all my life, but I never quite solved it. I
started off not breaking any law and in the end I openly declared we were
breaking the law. I went from one thing to another. The principle kind of
decays. But it is still a major jump, to say I will break laws, because I
disagree with them. I'm saying I paid my taxes. I obeyed the laws."

Question - So you didn't break the law unless there was a point to
breaking the law?

- "Yes. I could have broken the apartheid laws, but it didn't seem of
much effect to me."

Green says: "Without directly breaking the law, which might have led to
prosecutions, one would try - as far as I was concerned - to push the law
as far as possible to give those people some right of expression and to
look after their interests.

"The kind of thing I'm thinking of, I can't give you the exact date but
it would probably have been in the early 1980s, our reporters in Durban
had information about gross police abuses in Umlazi township, no,
Lamontville township. The police had raided various people, kicked their
doors in, knocked them around, forced their way into their houses in the
middle of the night and so forth looking for political suspects, and a
report was compiled that I was satisfied was accurate. The police had got
wind of the fact that our reporters had interested themselves, and our
police reporter, Greg Dardagan, came to me to say the police had told him
if the Daily News uses this, the police will use the Police Act. If you
publish this, it will be a contravention. You have to refer it to the
police, obviously, and the police will simply deny it. I was faced there
with a dilemma. What I did, after a certain amount of thought, was to get
in touch with Harry Pitman, a Progressive MP, and we got him to raise the
full document in Parliament the next day, which we could then report. So
furious was the government, I'm not sure who the minister was at the
time, that they threatened to extend the Police Act to statements made in
Parliament. That didn't go very far. But I merely cite that as an example
of the lengths one went to try to circumvent the law, to break down the
laws that prohibited publication.

"If I might cite another one, a man who is now quite an important ANC
member of Parliament and chairman of committees, Pravin Gordhan, was
detained without trial. This was probably in the late 1980s. We had wind
that, after he had been kept in solitary confinement for several weeks,
he had been taken to a hospital in Durban for psychiatric treatment
suffering from long periods of solitary confinement, and we checked this
out. In fact, two of our reporters who knew him saw him through the
hospital window and waved. He waved back. We knew he was there. We
approached the local police officer, couldn't make any headway, nothing
was to be reported about this, but we informed Mrs Gordhan, who knew
nothing about this. With our help, she got to the head of security police
in Natal and he said yes, her husband was in hospital, wasn't seriously
ill and she couldn't see him. And she told us this and we put it in the
paper. We had a regulation visit from two senior officers and a captain
of the security police saying they were investigating a charge against
us. And I said: 'This information is confirmed by your own chief of
security police.' 'Ah,' he said, 'did he confirm it to you?' Well,
eventually that threatened prosecution was dropped. It was part of police
harassment. It was another example of the lengths which newspapers went
to try to protect the interests of people who were not in a position to
do so themselves. It hasn't stopped Mr Gordhan, I may say, from
criticising us quite severely from Parliament."

Tyson, in his book "Editors under Fire", recalls how The Star first
reported that South African troops were fighting in Angola: "On August 9
1975 SA forces invaded Angola at Ruacana. Government delayed confirmation
of the invasion. On August 11, Defence Minister P W Botha banned reports
of military movements on the Angolan border. The first SA soldier killed
had a death notice in the Rand Daily Mail put on front page just below an
SADF denial that SA soldiers were at war in Angola.

"Then on September 9, P W Botha sent a confidential message to editors
confirming the incursion into Angola. It had been withheld, because of
negotiations with the Portuguese. However, the press had already
side-stepped the Defence and Official Secrets Acts ban by slipping
through a technical loophole. The BBC and overseas media, unable to
confirm official SA involvement, reported 'SA elements' and 'SA
mercenaries' in armoured convoys deep in Angola. These reports made front
page lead reports in some papers, and Botha could do nothing about them."

Almost all Argus Group editors at that time whom I interviewed have
admitted trying to go as far as they could to tell the public what was
happening, in spite of the restrictive laws. Some went considerably
further than others in actively seeking loopholes in the law, and in
actually breaching the law.

Tyson, in his book, put the problem in context: "But during those 40-odd
years we operated on continually shifting sands. Some newspaper people,
even in the mainstream press, responded by turning to advocacy journalism
to promote the anti-apartheid cause. At the other end of the scale, some
'old-fashioned' editors who aspired to balance and objectivity became the
easiest to manipulate. Some editors never understood that the 'rules'
were continually changing.

"After 1985, for instance, one of the 'new rules' was: 'Never ask a
censor for a ruling. Never ask even your own lawyer for a legal guideline
on a restricting measure.

"The reason is that, if you ask that silly question, you will receive a
restricting answer. Yet, even towards the end, some newspapers were still
relying on 'official' news, and 'official' checks on news, which had been
gathered at considerable risk by other newspapers. The 'unofficial' - and
of necessity unsourced - news would be put to a government spokesman, who
would not merely deny the report, but condemn it and produce some fiction
of his own. In following this safe and 'responsible' course, a number of
journalists failed dismally to reflect reality - or at least that portion
of reality which it was possible by devious means to publish."

My experience recently, in interviewing editors of those days, was that
all admitted they could possibly have gone further than they did in
testing the limits of what they could get away with. The great problem
was that they were dealing with an invisible line, so they did not know
what would be regarded by the authorities as overstepping the mark to the
point of facing a prosecution.

To the extent that editors may have failed to push these news-publishing
risks to the absolute limit, they could be said to have failed the South
African public in an area often covering human rights.

It was certainly not a failure by intention, quite the opposite, but
there were areas of failure in this area of news coverage.

In the earlier years before the 1980s emergency, there was less searching
through regulations and laws with the intention of finding ways to breach
them, so the degree of omission was greater earlier in those apartheid
years than it was later.

For instance, it was believed for many years that the press was not able
to quote prisoners or publish their pictures. This was based on the
understanding that it was unjust to prisoners for the press to keep
harping on their previous crimes while they were still serving their
sentences. A law was actually interpreted as preventing the press from
such reporting or from publication of pictures.

But later on, when the campaign was on for the release of Nelson Mandela,
it was suddenly discovered that he could be quoted from jail and the
press could even publish his picture. There was a great scramble to try
to find pictures of him, because press library files generally didn't
have any from so long before.

Similarly, it was thought that the press could not publish ANC
statements, because it was a banned organisation and because its main
spokesmen were listed banned persons. Only later was it discovered that,
though the organisation was banned, its statements were not, provided
they were not issued by a banned person. The press then took to
publishing ANC statements without attribution to spokesmen (so avoiding
the need to establish whether the spokesman was banned or not), and the
government took no action.

It is in this area, of not being aware just how far the press could go,
and of not taking the trouble to explore these opportunities until news
coverage very close to base was seriously impeded by the emergency
regulations, that the press, including Argus company newspapers, omitted
news coverage affecting many human rights issues.





Section 6: Different agendas


I believe it is of key significance in considering this report to take
note of the main two vantage points from which the issue of human rights
abuses under apartheid is being viewed from within Independent Newspapers
and in press circles.

So fundamental is the division of opinion based on these separate agendas
that it can colour the whole field of assessing arguments presented, from
both sides, in this report.

Unfortunately, there is little common ground between them in the handling
of apartheid issues (though the liberals' view may be quite widely
accepted by black journalists under a full democracy), resulting in a
so-far unbridged chasm between the two schools of thought when looking
back at many of the fraught issues of those times.

The differences can be summarised briefly as the liberals' view versus
the liberationists' view. The liberals' view is held generally by white
editors and many of their white staff. The liberationists' view is held
generally by black journalists, so it has the added disadvantage of
representing a racial split in the company.

a) The Liberals' View

In terms of this outlook, the newspaper's role is seen as requiring
journalists to seek maximum objectivity in news coverage, to seek to
reflect balance between different viewpoints, to eliminate where possible
allowing personal feelings to place a bias on coverage given, and to be
fair to every point of view, even while the newspaper in its editorials
might take a strong stand on one side or another.

One white editor after another expressed complete commitment to these
principles. They felt this justified them in sending reporters on
assignments with government spokesmen, even when the purpose of the
assignment might have been to generate propaganda for apartheid. This was
done as part of representing one side of the unfolding drama of
apartheid, and suggestions that these practices could be seen as
collusion with apartheid, or with the perpetration of human rights
violations, were firmly rejected.

Here is a sample of how editors expressed this approach:

Green: "The role we saw ourselves in was to try to print the truth and as
much of the truth as was possible and in particular to try to protect the
people who were rendered to some degree defenceless by the laws of the
time."

A former editor of the Pretoria News and earlier of the Argus Africa News
Service (who does not wish his name to be recorded here): "The purpose of
a newspaper is to survive to inform. If it casts aside the fundamental
principle of objective journalism and is seen to be one-sided, it would
lose its readership base and its revenue and die. This is what happened
when the Rand Dail Mail's ordinary news pages became so heavily political
and soaked with subjectivity it lost its base. It is a fact that most
readers of any racial or political coloration respect a medium which is
factual, honest and comprehensive irrespective of its political stance as
stated in its editorials. Proof of this is the wide spectrums of
readership of such disparate papers as the Mail and Guardian and The
Citizen."

Tyson, in his book, said: "When the Rand Daily Mail folded, Allister
Sparks said of The Star: 'It is desperately trying to remain a dull
neutral and not assume the leading role of the Rand Daily Mail.' Our own
view was more prosaic. The Mail had failed for managerial reasons, but it
had also failed in its own editorial mission - its message was reaching
only the converted. The Star cherished its image of "grey" dependability,
authority and credibility. The dispassionate reporting of both sides of
every issue is the culture, as well as the strength, of a dominant
mainstream newspaper. We were desperately trying to be an effective agent
of change.

"Many times readers thought The Star was losing its balance and was
'giving too much exposure to allegations against the police and to the
people with grievances'. My fear is not that The Star will be unable to
maintain a reasonable balance in the future, but that our society itself
will become so unbalanced as to make the middle of the road irrelevant."

Van Schoor: "Africa has not been kind to its liberals. But liberals and
liberal democratics have nonetheless played a critical role in keeping
alive the concepts of freedom of speech and democracy, human rights and
equality before the law... I also believe we played a pivotal role in
keeping alive in the public mind concepts that the massive machinery of
government repression and propaganda were trying to suppress. I refer to
the democratic liberal principles of freedom of speech, freedom of the
press, human rights and equality before the law."

Drysdale: "The argument that if you are not for a political party, then
you are against it, is not true. What it does show is that you wish to be
independent. The core of my thinking as a journalist was that I did not
want to belong to a party. I did not want to be seen on the platforms of
any political party. And there were many journalists black and white who
did. There are many journalists black and white who identify with
political organisations. That is their right. I have no quarrel with
that. I am saying those of us who believe that we should stand
independently, and independent of political movements, serve the
interests of the readers better, because what happens when the party goes
down the tubes, then the journalists abandon the cause. Ah, that's great.
What kind of morality is that? That is infamous. That's not morality.
What we are talking about for independent, accurate journalism is
actually to stand aside from political interests, vested interests. That
is the sort of approach we certainly tried to take. That is not to say
that at various elections and referendums, when they came to the fore as
political issues, that we did not declare for political parties. But we
were not party-politically affiliated on a day-to-day basis, as were some
of the Nationalist papers. Most of them were party organs. That could not
be said of most English language newspapers."

Hobday: "What should be understood about Argus newspapers was that even
in these extraordinary circumstances, unreal abnormal circumstances, we
tried to stick to the principles of newspapering in which we were
founded. The principles were essentially summed up in the word
objectivity, balance, accuracy, fair, free flow of information and even
through those bad years, it is fair to say we tried our best to maintain
balance and to get both sides of the story. It caused a clash. We knew it
in our own newspapers. You would get reporters, not necessarily only
black reporters, but white reporters as well, who saw their role in a
militant and one-dimensional function. They were there to promote one
angle, totally anti-government, a totally liberationist role. This is not
how we were trained. Those principles of professional journalism were
part of the mix of our approach we adopted. It was the culture of our
profession at the time. It clashed with the liberationist's culture,
which said you are a militant journalist, you were their propagandist. We
eschewed propaganda. We were not propagandists. We were reporters. That
was the fundamental difference. It did lead to a clash. And to
disappointments among reporters who were trying to present propaganda.

"We said: 'This is not balanced. You have got to get the other side of
the story.' I think today that culture remains an overriding culture in
the Argus Company, now Independent Newspapers. It is the Western
traditional method of reporting."

New Nation, a black newspaper committed to the liberation struggle,
refused to publish an advertisement of the Natal KwaZulu Indaba.Green
wrote: "... it is singularly unfortunate if bishops and journalists
committed to the cause of freedom, have much to say about it and are
internationally honoured for their efforts, are reluctant to publish
things they don't agree with.

"The only other papers I know of in South Africa that adopt a similar
attitude in rejecting advertisements of political opponents are the
government-supporting Afrikaans papers. Odd bedfellows in this instance,
aren't they, the Nats, the bishops and the radicals?

"As I noted earlier, it is not always easy for liberals to stick to
democratic principles in South Africa. But stick to them we must, even
when they go slightly sour on us."

Tyson, who recorded this article in his book "Editors under Fire",
commented: "That column reflects a small sample of the differences, often
the tensions, between 'committed' journalists and those striving for
'objectivity'."

b) the liberationists' view

Tyson explained the attitude of Zwelakhe Sisulu, now chief executive of
the SABC, but earlier the editor of New Nation, more fully: "Zwelakhe
Sisulu rejected co-operation with the state," Tyson wrote.

"He was committed to the cause of liberation, and said there was no place
for neutrality or 'objectivity' in South Africa. Neutrality meant
co-option, he believed. After he launched the New Nation, following
periods of detention and going on a Nieman Fellowship, he said his
philosophy as editor was 'not whether one is propagandist or not, but
whether one is a collaborationist propagandist or a revolutionary
propagandist ... If committed is an alternative to non-committed, then
surely we are propagandist.' This is a viewpoint shared by many black
journalists, but by no means all, and was particularly true of black
journalists in relation to the liberation struggle against apartheid.
Today there are more black journalists who are happy to be independent
and objective (some recently ran foul of President Mandela for that
stance), but they were not independent or objective about apartheid.
After the Soweto riots, the liberation cause was their cause as much as
it was the cause of ANC, PAC, UDF, BCM, Azapo or any other black
political movement. From this attitude has come the view that journalists
and newspapers following the liberal philosophy were "collaborationist
propagandists", colluders with apartheid, part of the apartheid system,
bearing some of the responsibility for the sufferings of blacks under
apartheid.

The alternative press, seeking a niche as champions of the liberation
struggle, tended to reinforce this view of the mainstream press to make
legitimised space for itself in the market, but this smear has been
rejected by mainstream anti-apartheid newspapers inside and outside the
Argus Group. Pather was asked whether there were tensions between white
and black journalists in the Daily News newsroom when he was a reporter.

"Yes there were. We came out of different experiences. And we viewed
things through different perspectives, especially you take the question
of apartheid in sport. If the South African selectors decided to include
a token black in their rugby team, the black members of staff would have
said so and that this was totally unacceptable. We actually needed a
situation where everyone had equal opportunity to get into a totally
non-racial side. And there would sometimes be very fierce arguments in
the newsroom. Some whites accused us of being over-sensitive, singing the
same old story whenever we were consistently critical of whatever was
being done by government. They did not go through the same sort of
experience as blacks did. Blacks courted more police attention than white
journalists. It was a fact of life. Black journalists were more prone to
arrest, house arrest or confiscation of passport or restrictions in
travel than most of the white journalists."

Pather, as has been recorded above, was repeatedly harassed by police in
trying to do his job as a reporter. He was asked whether his newspaper
took the matter up with the authorities.

"I must say at that stage I did not even expect anybody on the newspaper
to take up the cudgels on my behalf. I'm not saying there were not people
who were concerned. There were people quite high up in the newspaper I
know would come to me and sympathise and express anger at what had
happened to me and some of my colleagues. Nothing more than that was done
about it, so over time it was something you did not expect, that anybody
would take it any further. There would have been an editorial expressing
criticism of bans on organisations and so on, but not down to the
behaviour of policemen searching your homes. I also think that while some
editors at that stage did a sterling job in opposing apartheid, in
opposing the entire policy, others believed that editorials criticising
that obnoxious system would suffice. I believe there was more for them to
do."

The difference of attitude to liberation struggle methods was contrasted
in a conversation I had with Pather. He said: "It was understandable that
black people under the conditions in which they lived in many instances
couldn't tell the difference between what was right from what was wrong.
Many things fell into the area of criminality when they were just the
makings of the government. Just the carrying of a passbook was a
requirement of the government of that time and non-compliance meant he
was guilty of a crime.

"I remember saying to my white colleagues on the Daily News that I had
once lied under oath, and I did not think it was wrong. And they were
aghast. I said if you were in my shoes you would have done the same,
because the police had called me into the police station and said to me
that a person who had been banned had come in to see me at the newspaper
office.

"I do not regard that as something wrong. I actually regard that person
as a respected member of society and he had come in to see me. He wasn't
preaching terrorism or anything of the sort. To me the law was wrong.
When he asked me whether my friend had come into the office, I said no.

I was prepared to take an oath and say no. I had not done anything wrong.
In different circumstances, I would probably have acted differently."

I have quoted Klaaste as saying that during the activism of the late
1970s and during the 1980s black journalists were black before they were
journalists. He also said: "I think it was almost like a high people were
on. And that is how they reported too. They reported with an advocacy
which was plainly out there. You must remember we had rather a suspicion
of all whites. All South African whites. We were very suspicious of them.
Sometimes there was downright hatred of them."

But while that was the mood, black journalists on the Sowetan had to
respond to one huge threat to them. Two newspapers had been closed by the
government under them already.

"When the World was banned, the company lost a lot of money and there was
always this sword hanging over our heads. You guys have got to watch out
because you can't get another paper banned like this. And that was like a
Sword of Damocles."

Questioner - Your jobs were at stake?

- "Absolutely, and not only our jobs, but it was quite plain everybody
else would be without a job if we got into trouble."

Questioner - So you had to feel your way pretty carefully?

- "Absolutely. And in the 1980s and 90s it got bad, you know. We also got
into trouble with the ANC, with Cosatu, and the paper was boycotted. It
was a terrible time for us."





Section 7: The great divide


a) socialism, communism and the total onslaught

The South African liberation movements, in advancing their struggle
against apartheid, had no compunction in forming alliances and receiving
financial and military aid from communist or socialist countries, and
from countries spurned in the West because of their support for
international terrorist actions.

This "alliance with the devil" (as seen through liberal eyes) increased
the tension not only between liberation movements and the government, but
also caused them to be opposed by the mainstream opposition press,
including Argus newspapers.

Communism and even milder forms of socialism have generally been opposed
by the majority of whites in South Africa, whether within the Nationalist
government or inside opposition parties, and Argus Company editors
generally took a liberal position opposed to communist/socialist
expansion into South Africa.

Though they were themselves often accused by Nationalist propagandists of
being "pinkos" and "communist fellow-travellers" for opposing apartheid,
Argus editors did not hesitate to distance themselves from
communist/socialist aims, mainly because liberal philosophies are
inherently at odds with those of socialism and communism. PW Botha's
government in the 1980s used this common opposition among whites to
socialist policies and alliances to build a huge propaganda campaign and
"total strategy" against the "total onslaught" which it claimed was being
waged against the country by communist and liberation forces.

The degree of common ground between the Argus newspapers' policies and
the government's total strategy were, however, extremely limited.

A former editor of the Argus Africa News Service (who chooses not to have
his name recorded here) had considerable experience of reporting wars in
Africa where a communist element was involved. He had a very definite
view on Botha's propaganda campaign. He said Botha had been inspired by a
book "Total War" written by Gaullist French general Andre Beaufre
advocating a total response to a total onslaught, but in the context of a
classical conflict like World War Two. In such a situation, he argued, a
nation should use every conceivable resource, including the media, to
fight off an enemy intent on conquest. The editor said Botha "seized upon
this philosophy hugely to inflate the image of the ANC attack on South
Africa, backed by the looming might of the Communist Bloc, into a
monstrous threat far beyond reality."

The editor conceded that the campaign served to scare the Nats and many
other whites and Parliament into voting Defence ever larger budgets. He
said the communist threat was "minimal" and "the ANC never came close to
the military capacity to threaten South Africa seriously."

He said United States experts on communism confirmed to him that Russia
did not want a full-scale southern African war, but merely wanted a
regional stand-off as an irritation in the American side.

Interviews with a string of Argus editors and former editors confirmed to
me that none of them was convinced by the "total onslaught" propaganda.

Wyllie put the communist threat at no more than 30%, but said the threat
of the liberation movements was more like 70%.

Van Schoor, who as editor of the Pretoria News sat on the press/defence
liaison committee, said: "We all knew that total onslaught was the
government's political device to justify its continued use of racism. The
threat of communism was believed by many people, probably sincerely held
by some members of government, but the communist threat and the total
onslaught were a strategy designed to protect the government and entrench
a racist policy and white privilege, and none of us believed it.

Nor did our paper believe it ever. We reported what the government said
about it, but we reported it with a balance of other views. It is very
difficult to ignore what the government is talking about from every
platform. What the government did was take a distant threat and turned it
into a justification for apartheid. We never believed it."

b) attitude to political rights for blacks

Throughout the period under review, Argus Company newspapers supported
increased political rights for disfranchised groups of colour. It is
probable, if individual editors had been asked during much of that period
for their view on what political rights blacks should have, that a
variety of answers would have been given.

It is also probable that most would not have expressed support for a
simple transfer of power from whites to blacks. But the question would
have been somewhat academic, in that their editorial policies were
determined by practical issues of the day. The National Party was in
power, propagating separate political rights for different races groups,
and those in opposition were proposing alternative plans that could
possibly gain support when put to an all-white electorate.

A simple transfer of power would definitely not have been supported by
the white electorate, so more incremental or gradualist proposals that
could possibly persuade the electorate into accepting an eventual broad
democracy for all races were put forward. The details of these proposals
varied from one election to the next over the 33-year period of this
review, eventually giving way to a realisation that the country's
politics had changed so far that parliamentary opposition parties were
becoming irrelevant to the main political agenda, and that it was
black-led liberation movements who offered alternative policies the
country had to take note of. White opposition partners had been sidelined
by events. So a division between black and white on this constitutional
issue was real.

There must have been few blacks indeed who wanted anything less than full
democratic rights NOW throughout that period. While white Argus editors
were prepared to move in that direction, they all opted for a gradual
extension of political rights for most of the period under review, moving
in later years ever more strongly to urging constitutional solutions not
through party blueprints, but through direct negotiations with the
liberation movements.

c) attitude to liberation struggle methods

One of the greatest bones of contention between blacks and whites
generally, and it was equally true among black and white journalists, was
over the methods adopted by the liberation movements to advance their
ambitions to overthrow apartheid.

Most blacks felt, even if they did not actively participate, that
liberation struggle methods were fully justified, because the prospects
of achieving a negotiated settlement without it seemed minimal.

White liberal editors throughout never abandoned their call for peaceful
change and negotiation rather than violence. They openly opposed the use
of bombs and land mines against the civilian public, and even against
military targets, and they were against isolation policies,
disinvestment, economic sanctions, sport boycotts, internal commercial
boycotts, making the townships ungovernable, liberation before education
and any other slogan tactics of that ilk.

One former editor said: "The point I come from is this one: you can be an
activist member of the struggle or you can be like the majority of South
Africans black and white and many good people who were not for violence.
And I was never for violence. I was against the institutionalised
violence of the government. I didn't see what a terrorist or liberation
struggle of attacking human targets in this country was going to achieve
except total bitterness. We would have had a Northern Ireland on our
hands for another 40 years, in my view. The business of staying within
the law was difficult, because the law itself was questionable if not
illegal. Some of us moved from refusing to break the law to actively
breaking the law, but not to perpetrate violence. Again I don't feel I
have to defend myself against anyone for human rights or anything else to
say I will not take to violence to put things right. I still think that
is wrong. Those are the basic issues.

"Now if you are working within the system, is that a crime? That is
something that bothered me for years. I had two worries: the precedent of
Germany and of several other fascist states like Argentina and of
Rhodesia. And the Rhodesian newspapers fought a very honourable campaign
against sectional racist government until civil war occurred. We never
had a civil war. And then they became captive of the government. My worry
always was: would we become captive of the government? And that is one of
several reasons why I called a conference called Conflict of the Press
and brought in experts from around the world to examine issues such as
this. I would commend to you ... it was Baroness Durnhoff of Die Zeit she
specifically addressed this point ... she said she lived under the Nazis
and worked under the Nazis, and ran from them. She said there comes a
point when you cannot run a newspaper honourably. And she said you are
nowhere near that point. That was in 1987. We all had worries: were we
propping up the apartheid regime? There was a report in Business Day
recently, saying editors agreed that they allowed apartheid. I disagree
with that totally. I don't believe there is any point in being a
newspaperman if you are actually part of holding up the system. That is
the crux of our business, whether by working within the system and not
taking to the streets, because there was no choice, you either fought it
by fleeing the country or going underground, or you worked within the
system. I repudiate totally and with vehemence anyone who suggests that
those who fought within the system affected other people's human rights.
In fact there are very few - very, very few - South Africans who actively
fought outside the system. Many supported it, but very few actively did
it. And some of them perpetrated offences against human rights, those who
fought against apartheid, by the very nature of their violence, so I
think again that it doesn't require to be defended that one worked within
the system."

Hobday had this to say on liberation struggle methods: " I don't think we
were fooled into believing in the total onslaught, but there was no doubt
that the liberationists' war was an onslaught. So were sanctions. But who
was responsible for sanctions? We saw the onslaught as the just deserts
of that government.

"I as an editor never supported sanctions. I cannot say I supported the
liberation movement. What we supported was reasoned negotiation. And, as
it turned out, it was reasoned negotiation that won the day. Violence did
not do it, and never would. It would have replaced one form of political
terrorism with another. One tyranny with another tyranny. As it was,
throughout the years, consistently, we argued for negotiation, reason,
compromise. That is what we got. I think we can look back as editors on
those four decades with some justification and satisfaction in that the
thing we argued for right in the beginning came to pass. I think if we
had to look back to summarise what the Argus papers were doing: 'What did
you do during the war daddy?'- We did our job. That's what we did, and we
did it as best we could. You can quibble with this and you can quibble
with that, but at the end of the day we did our job. And if you want the
proof of the pudding, it's in the eating, where we are today. That's what
we wanted.

That's what we fought for and that's what we got."

d) the alternative press

The alternative press developed in the 1980s with such publications as
the Weekly Mail, South and Work in Progress entering the political arena
as media which supported the liberation cause and specialised in exposing
the wrongdoings of the Nationalist administration.

These publications differed from the mainstream opposition press in more
ways than the emphasis of their politics. They were not dependent on
advertising or readership levels to pay their costs, but were lavishly
sponsored by mainly foreign organisations wishing to strengthen the
pressures for change inside South Africa.

This difference in their economic make-up enabled them to keep
publishing, and keep getting their message across, in circumstances which
would have been quite impossible for the commercial press. They were
highly political, published shock reports that satisfied the masses' mood
though they had low circulations and did not attract advertisers with
such material. But they showed the government up for the ruthless and
corrupt machine it had become.

Tyson commented in his book "Editors under Fire": "Into the gap left by
the RDM came the alternative press, which attacked the opposition press
for failing in its duty to bring down the National Party and for failing
to express the views of 'the people'. Most believed that things like
balance, 'objectivity' and all those other old-fashioned values were not
only irrelevant, but a hindrance in the war against a total onslaught on
freedom.

"It was necessary for them to denigrate the mainstream opposition press
to justify their own existence and to garner overseas funding."

He noted that the 'commercial press' (a sneer from academics, students
and alternative journalists) adopted a pained silence, and admitted that
some of the criticism of the new wave was true of much of the mainstream
press.

"Many newspapers, battered by economics as well as racial politics, were
finding it impossible to cope with their normal role of bridging the
prejudices of their divided communities. Many had lost touch with 'the
radicals' and indeed with the oppressed masses."

The government moved against these alternative papers, giving them added
status among those for whom they wrote. More journalists were thrown in
jail, more journals were threatened, confiscated or temporarily closed.

The effect of the arrival of the alternative press on the media scene was
to provide the mass democratic movement, the UDF and later the unbanned
organisations with friendlier coverage, allowing them to obtain some of
the best political news breaks of the time.

The Argus Group and other mainstream opposition media were made to look
more reactionary than they were in the political arena, for a time, but
as democratic transition got into its stride, overseas subsidisation of
the alternative press began to dry up, and the Argus Group took steps to
improve its contacts into the rapidly emerging new power group.

The Weekly Mail tried to launch a commercial daily against The Star, but
was driven under in a matter of weeks. It has retained a viable weekly
spot in the market, supported commercially and with the backing of The
Guardian in London.

The rest of the alternative press has largely fallen by the wayside.





Section 8: Collusion with apartheid


On January 7 1997, ex-Sowetan senior journalist Mathatha Tsedu wrote an
article in The Star which demonstrates the differences liberationist
journalists have had with the liberal mainstream newspapers.

Referring to a previous article written by Raymond Louw, chairman of the
Freedom of Expression Institute and former editor of the Rand Daily Mail
and manager of Saan, Tsedu wrote: "While Louw is right in saying that the
Afrikaans press had supported the NP wholeheartedly, basically the same
can be said of the English press if one was to do a close investigation
of their stand. For example, when Louw was editor of the Rand Daily Mail,
the paper supported the then Progressive Party, which called for a
qualified franchise, which would have left all whites with the vote but
only a few blacks (those with more than R50 000 immovable property or a
matric certificate) able to vote.

"He claimed the editorial policies of these newspapers "could be relied
upon to kowtow to the NP when the chips were down, such as when SADF
commandos raided countries such as Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, Lesotho
and Zimbabwe, killing innocent civilians in the name of the defence of
Western civilisation."

Saturday Star columnist Jon Qwelane, previously an assistant editor on
the Sunday Star, wrote in a column on January 11 1997 that he had called
for South Africa's media bosses to be brought before the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission to explain "their naked collusion with
apartheid".

He went on to argue that "it is not only the manner in which our bosses
failed us as journalists which must be investigated and exposed, but also
the hopelessly indefensible treatment which they gave the news. Perhaps
the most indefensible part of collaboration with the apartheid regime by
media bosses was the secret pact which they sealed with the dictator P W
Botha, a pact which gave the so-called 'total strategy' madness undue
respectability.

"Mr Botha got together the media moguls through the Newspaper Press Union
and at an unpublicised gathering, it was agreed by all concerned that
there was a 'communist-inspired total onslaught' against South Africa and
it required a 'total strategy' to counter it. A state of emergency was
declared and the army and police were given the go-ahead to do as they
pleased with our lives on grounds of acting in 'good faith'."

He claimed later in the article that the press were an "active party" to
the total strategy which had caused press censorship. He also alleged
that, while the English press railed loudly against the iniquities of
apartheid, actions in dealings with black personnel took the opposite
direction, "supporting and enforcing apartheid to the hilt".

These allegations by Tsedu and Qwelane help to underline the problem I
have already drawn to your attention of black and white journalists, even
within the same company, having different agendas.

The black agenda finds the mainstream opposition newspapers (necessarily
including the Argus group) guilty of collusion with apartheid for
supporting a qualified franchise at a certain stage in the period under
review and of conniving with P.W. Botha in his "total onslaught"
campaign. There is no doubt these opinions are genuinely held, and from
their outlook, could seem justified.

But they seem like a serious and mischievous distortion if looked at from
the vantage point of liberal journalism. The qualified franchise was not
support for separate development, seen from the liberal point of view.
Quite the contrary. It was regarded as a stepping stone to the eventual
full enfranchisement of black South Africa within one political system,
as opposed to the NP's separate racial states formula.

The qualified franchise was a formula adopted in an attempt to woo white
South African voters into accepting eventually a common future in one
country with black South Africans. It was abandoned as a policy as the
national political equation changed to the point where it was no longer
relevant to look to white opposition parties to develop policies to
change separate development. Black South Africans had developed so much
political muscle that the ruling party saw it was inevitable that it
abandon apartheid through negotiations with the ANC, other members of the
liberation movement, and all other political groups.

The charge against the opposition press would thus seem unfair viewed
from the liberal perspective, but viewed from the perspective of black
political aspirations, it is not so far-fetched. The adoption of a
qualified franchise would in effect have reinforced white power and
undermined black aspirations of rapid political advancement for a
considerable period. It would have made black political advancement
dependent on educational advancement and personal wealth, criteria that
are not essential elements of a working democracy. Even the poorest and
least educated may know which political party will advance their
interests best. Seen that way, the white mainstream liberal press was
praising apartheid with faint damns, and was conniving with apartheid for
the sake of perpetuating white privilege into an indefinite future.

I believe it is difficult to judge the merits of these two sides without
accepting either the liberationists' or the liberals' premises. Both have
a case to make which is valid within those frameworks.

a) participation in news conferences, briefings, tours etc

Black journalists have noted the way the mainstream opposition press
continued to participate in police and defence agreements with the
government, to attend press conferences and confidential political
briefings, go on tours with ministers and with the Prime Minister and
later the State President, and go on inspection tours of the military
situation on the Angola-SWA border.

All this, to liberationist thinking, smacks strongly of collusion with
apartheid, especially as the government's purpose with so many of these
media events was to use them for heavy propaganda purposes.

Virtually no balancing briefings or tours with the liberation movements
were possible, so the propaganda advantage was heavily stacked in favour
of the government.

Argus Group editors interviewed on this question were unanimous in saying
it was their duty to send reporters to these press conferences,
briefings, tours etc, because what the government was doing in South
Africa over the period under review was "more than half the story" and no
newspaper could be properly informed without being present.

They strongly denied that government propaganda was meekly and naively
swallowed by their reporters or by the editors themselves.

Sullivan, who was political correspondent during part of those times,
says: "Most of the time we came back and wrote things that horrified the
people who had taken us on the tours. They said: why could we not be good
like the Afrikaans press or some of the tamer newspapers like The
Citizen? I came back from a Koevoet tour and wrote that it was a ruthless
killing force. And Lothar Neethling threatened to shoot me. He said: 'How
can you call it a ruthless killing force?' I said: 'Well, what is it?' He
said: 'We are protecting the people in the area.' I said: 'Rubbish.

"I wrote it was a ruthless killing force and General de Witt called me up
and said: how could I say that? That was exactly what it was. And most of
those trips, if you looked at how The Star journalists came back, it was
always at odds with a lot of others. I went to Taiwan with PWBotha on a
state visit. And everybody wrote Taiwan was so happy and didn't want to
be a separate state. And I wrote that they were unhappy and wanted to be
a separate state. I have always believed you need a very short spoon to
sup with the devil. If we didn't go on those trips, Beeld would have come
back and painted such a wonderfully rosy picture of what was going on and
there would be nobody to give the opposite side."

Green had this to say: "To some extent you had to rely on official
statements. For example, the Defence Act as you well know, laid a cloak
over all information, and if we didn't use statements from the Defence
Force, we wouldn't have known anything. Where we had information from
other sources, we were legally obliged to check it out. Where we felt it
was official propaganda, we often said so by way of leaders or by
interviewing other party politicians. As far as media tours are
concerned, I went on three tours of the border. Now, was that
participation? I suppose it was, but at the same time you could see what
was going on and it was better to have some information than no
information. Also, the fact that we travelled in a fairly large group, if
I remember it was about 20 editors at a time, it is not so easy to
brainwash you when you've got all your colleagues there. On at least one
tour, some of us got into quite acrimonious discussions with senior
officers, where they accused us of not caring if they got killed and we
said we did care. They were under no illusions that we were just fellow
travellers."

Question - Did you feel that a lot of their statements were
propagandistic?

- Yes. I think they were propagandistic. It depended who they were. Then
you get a chap like Jannie Geldenhuys, he was chief of the army for a
time, he was a lot more reasonable. He actually saw we were not
necessarily going to agree with him."

Van Schoor, who was Pretoria News editor during part of the 1980s, said:
"You have to remember that the propaganda machine was pervasive. You
couldn't 'not go' on assignments, because the government's was at least
half the story and you had to use all contacts possible. Yes, people went
on them."

Question - Did you feel by going on them that you were part of the
apartheid machine?

- "You must think what it was like in those circumstances. You couldn't
close your eyes and ears to what they were saying, but it is how you
received it and how you used it. Yes you had to have contact with them.
You had to have contacts with them. Just as you had to try all you could
to have contacts with the underground, so to speak. All the time when
dealing with the government, you knew you were dealing with a huge
propaganda machine. And if it was not straight propaganda, it was
selected information aimed at promoting the government's interests.
Everything you got from those sources you got knowing whence it came.

"You would have to be very naive to believe we swallowed everything the
government fed us. The government saw our very presence as part of their
machine, because they were the ones who took us into the border areas,
but we never bought into that philosophy, never. In fact, through the
Conference of Editors, I was the one who had to attend the military
briefings, against my better judgement, because they were utterly useless
exchanges in which the military was telling exactly what they wanted to
and avoiding the tougher questions that we asked. We ended our
association with the Defence liaison body, because we knew it was being
abused by them and we wanted no part in it. But while it existed, yes, we
did go with our eyes wide open. We weren't used, I don't believe."

All other white editors in the group spoke along similar lines, and the
only question to ask is whether, even accepting that Argus editors and
their reporters were on their guard against propaganda, a full and fair
picture emerged in Argus newspapers as a result of attending these
briefings and going on these tours.

My own view is that, while propaganda was often shown as propaganda,
there were huge difficulties in balancing the propaganda by getting the
other side, so some of the distortion did stick. There were times, such
as with cross-border raids, where the initial government propaganda of
hitting nests of activists waiting to attack South Africa was published
as fact, but very often within a day or two other reports would come to
hand suggesting that - far from being a successful raid on trained
liberation forces - many innocents unconnected with the conflict had been
killed in these attacks. So, to some extent the balance was restored,
though I doubt that complete balance was achieved. Of course, it must be
remembered that it was not just the SADF that was killing unfortunate
innocents. Many of the people killed by liberation forces' bombs and land
mines were complete innocents. In some respects, that was even worse than
SADF mistakes in killing innocents, because ANC cadres knew before the
bombs, land mines and grenades went off that their victims would be
innocents ... yet they still went ahead and did it.

b) racial discrimination practices within the company, and black
disadvantages

Several examples of discriminatory practice have been brought to my
attention during this inquiry.

Pather has a clear recollection of incidents he experienced personally:
"I was called in for an interview and told I was the best candidate
available, but I had to come in in a couple of days. They needed to check
on my background. When I came back, they said they were given to believe
that I was a political hothead, that I had been in trouble with the
special branch, that I had associated with people like Steve Biko and
Strini Moodley and Saths Cooper, something I thought would have been of
benefit to my application. I asked them whether they thought I was going
to get subversive material into their columns surreptitiously.

"I was told it was a large company and they couldn't afford to take
chances and that I should wait for my letter of acceptance. Up to today
the letter has not come.

"They took on Subri Govender. Two years later Subri phoned me and said
the Daily News was going to take on a second black journalist. I applied
and I was asked the same question by the same person. I said my answer
was the same as two years ago. I think by then they had matured
sufficiently to accept that. My own political views were not relevant
here. We are talking about 1974 and then the end of 1975 and they then
gave me the job. I started at the beginning of 1976. It was only about a
year ago that I spoke to the person who interviewed me and it was not the
editor. It turned out they had consulted the special branch. Roy Barnard,
the crime reporter, went to the news editor and said: 'Do you want to
know about that guy's background, I'll find out.' It turned out he went
to the special branch."

Pather had other experiences too. He said: "I believe I helped the
company to change its mind about segregated canteens, because we just
defied regulations. The first day I joined, I got hungry and went to the
canteen. They told me I couldn't be served. I said I was paying for my
meal, so what was the problem? I wasn't bucking the system, because I
didn't know the system. I showed the guy I was a member of the staff and
showed my staff card and he said: 'Sorry these are the regulations.' He
pointed me to another room that was darkened and had a shelf and
pigeonhole through which they served blacks after they had exhausted the
white queue. I bought my meal and sat down at one of the tables and then
got rude insults from staff members of the works department, (I knew they
were from the works) because they were all wearing overalls.

"I had a choice of avoiding this and taking my meal to a table or just
insisting on my rights. I carried on eating at these tables. It was
lonely at the beginning, but a few years later there were others like
Quraysh Patel, Kuswayo also used the canteen facilities and stood up to
these guys who passed racial insults. The company then divided the
canteen into two, with the strategic placing of pot plants. One was
whites only and the other was international, which was totally
unacceptable. We sat where we liked and a number of whites joined us in
defying the regulations. There was one instance where a staff member
standing next to me said: 'If you want your curry, why don't you go to
your coolie canteen upstairs?' They used to have a separate canteen that
only produced curry. And so I went up to my news editor and said: 'You
are going to have to do something about this or you can have my
resignation.' That was taken up with the editor and the works department,
and I pointed out the person to the works manager. There was an inquiry
and I think eventually the editor called me in and said they took the
matter quite seriously and asked whether the guy should be fired. The
editor took the view that it was the chap's first offence and just warned
him and got the assurance it would not happen again. The works chapel
father came to see me and asked whether the guy should be made to
apologise, and I said only if he wanted to, but not if he had to have his
arm twisted.

"Those were the times. We were living at a time a lot of white people
refused to associate with black people and were victims of racial
stereotypes. They knew nothing of other groups, so based all their
thinking on stereotypes. They were actually victims of propaganda."

Question - Were the toilets separated?

- "Yes."

Question - When did that break down?

- "I don't think too much attention was paid to that. While the law said
one thing, people ignored the law generally. Slowly toilet apartheid
became a thing of the past."

Drysdale recalls an experience when he was editor of the Pretoria News:
"I had no experience of any black journalist who complained. Perhaps I
was fortunate. I will tell you one interesting little anecdote, which
came from my early Pretoria News years, and I was the first guy to hire
the first black on the Pretoria News. One of the guys popped his head
round my office door and said: 'We have got our new black colleague with
us. Tell me, I feel awkward asking about this, which toilet should he
use?' Remember those were the years of strict segregation. I said to him:
'The nearest one.' End of story."

What emerges from these examples, and was typical, is that white
journalists were the most ready to accept black colleagues among them,
while resistance to the presence of black reporters being treated equally
with white employees was strongest in other departments. I recall a
Christmas party wetstone at The Star in the early 1970s, at which the
works department were the traditional hosts.

That year, because black reporters were now in the newsroom, individual
invitations to members of the editorial staff were introduced for the
first time, where previously there was an open invitation to all
departments (with the assumption that it was only for whites). A separate
Christmas party was held for black works staff. When the invitations had
been issued, and the editorial department had analysed what was going on,
it was found that all white members of the editorial staff had been
invited, and the black members left out. The editorial department then
decided to boycott the wetstone in sympathy with their black colleagues
who had not been invited. This was a snub of considerable consequence
within the newspaper, because journalists relied heavily on the works
department's co-operation to get news breaks into the paper ... sometimes
at the very last moment. The editor, John Jordi, was seriously
embarrassed, though he accepted the reasons for the boycott. Another side
to discrimination then came into play. The white reporters, having done
themselves out of a party by making a stand on principle for their black
colleagues, decided to hold a party of their own at the hotel across the
road. Only when the party was well under way was it discovered that no
black journalists were present.

The reason? The hotel did not allow black guests. White journalists had
not given that a thought, which showed the extent to which apartheid had
become so much a part of people's lives that even rocking the boat with
apartheid did not sound alarm bells of what was involved. The following
year, management insisted a blanket invitation be sent to the editorial
department, but only a few blacks attended the wetstone. They were
ostentatiously snubbed by some white employees from other departments,
and the only people the black reporters could talk to were their own
black or white editorial colleagues. At the end of the evening, one of
the white reporters who had befriended black reporters at the function
was assaulted by a member of the works staff as he left the premises.

Klaaste said two things irked black journalists very greatly about the
"white" papers in the group. The first was that they referred to
liberation movement cadres as "terrorists". He said that was a very sore
point. Some white journalists, on the other hand, felt quite strongly
that they should have been called "terrorists", because they committed
acts of terror against innocent people.

But on Klaaste's other point, white journalists readily admit fault.
Klaaste said: "Traditionally, because they were white newspapers, they
reported white names but only black statistics. There were no people who
were black who were made of flesh and blood. We put a face to the guys.
Even if it was an ordinary man. And it was extraordinary, because even in
matters that were not political, like a mine blast, (the white papers
would report) so many white men were killed and their names were there,
but no names of blacks."

Latakgomo says: "Much of the debate has been muddied in a manner of
speaking by people talking about whether the companies employed black
journalists full time, whether they had separate toilets, whether they
were promoted or weren't promoted. We must first of all accept that, in
the political situation of the time, most companies were guilty of that
kind of discrimination against black people. So it is not as if
journalists were selected for that kind of abuse."

But there was a problem at the top on black papers in the company, which
Latakgomo put his finger on: "I think it was part of the policy of the
company at the time, it was significant that the two black newspapers in
the company had what was called editorial directors. Ilanga had an
editorial director in Arthur Konigkramer and the World had Charles Still.
It was clear that the black editors did not have the kind of control of
the content of the publications that they should have had. I said I was
not sure whether the publications were running on sport, women and crime
by design or whether it was because of a dearth of real political
activity, but I rather suspect it was by design. We had to steer clear of
the contentious things, steer clear of political things.

"I was acting editor and I recall very well a strategic planning meeting
which was held at Kyalami. One of the points I made at that meeting was
that black executives were in fact toothless on The World, even within
The World, because one would have thought having a black publication and
having a black editor that at least the black editor would have the
authority to give direction in terms of policy. That wasn't in fact so,
and I found that out, well we all knew that, but I found that out
personally. During the time I was editor, if I had to write a leader, it
had to go to Charles Still. And if he didn't like it, it didn't go in. So
whose voice was the newspaper actually representing? Percy (Qoboza, who
was away overseas) would have had to go through the exactly same thing,
It wasn't just because I was acting editor. When we were dealing with
that issue, we resolved that I be called what I actually was, assistant
editor. And to acknowledge it. Even a guy like Ewold Nene, who was a
great soccer guy. He knew he was half illiterate. He would come into my
office and say to me, can he do this?

"If he didn't like my response, he said he would go and talk to my boss,
Charles Still. And he would go to Charles Still and get it done. It was a
very awkward situation. So I think I am relating this, because it seemed
to me a conscious policy to keep the paper out of trouble. Throughout
that period either they had no confidence in their black editors or ... I
mean, M.T. Moerane who was editor before Percy was simply a figurehead
editor. I vividly recall his farewell speech in which he for the first
time spoke out and actually said: 'I hope things will turn out better for
you guys (Percy and myself).' But clearly he must have felt very
uncomfortable with the manner."

Question - Did you feel uncomfortable?

- "Things were beginning to move and I was not able to reflect it in the
paper. Any time we needed to do that, there were these tensions between
myself and Charlie Still. He was a newspaper man determined to make the
newspaper work, determined to keep the newspaper out of trouble. He was
too cautious. I recall, after The World closed, he was moved to the Daily
News and I went down to Durban and I went to make a courtesy call. He
said: 'Listen my boy,' that is how he used to speak, 'Listen my boy, I'll
tell you something. I warned the company that unless we were careful,
this newspaper would be closed down. And he pulled out a piece of paper
and said: 'Here. I actually wrote this memo...' And he said he had warned
the company that black editors were going ... the way the paper was going
to be closed down.

"I said to him: 'What was it that made you uncomfortable?'. He said:
'Listen, leave politics alone.' As far as he was concerned, if he had
been there, The World would not have suffered that fate. I think The
World would have succeeded, but I don't think at the time the newspaper
was given the resources a paper of its level and status should have had.
In money spent. We were sitting in the worst environment. When we went to
The Star, it was like heaven. Our salaries were lower. It was absolutely
shoestring. Still, I don't think enough was done to make The World a
viable newspaper."

Question - When Post Transvaal replaced The World, was anything changed?

- "I was not put in charge. A guy named Miskelly was put in charge. He
was effectively the editor. Again it was a matter of making sure we don't
get out of step. I think it was a conscious step by management. Their
attitude was that the government had warned the Post: 'One step out of
line, and you will be closed down as well.'"

Another issue which caused bad feeling between black journalists and
Argus management arose over what started as a sympathy strike at Post
Transvaal for journalists at the Cape Herald, and ended with Post
Transvaal being closed down.

Klaaste remembers: "No, it was not about politics, although the leaders
of the strike tried to give it a political slant, because it was black
guys and white management. And Percy and I and Thami Mazwai were not on
strike until the management guy made a mistake then, because Percy didn't
know what to do, quite frankly. The management guy said he was going to
call the police. Percy in huff got mad and angry and walked out, and we
all walked out and we joined the strike.

"And that is when we were down there (pointing down the road). There were
presses there and everything. And the reason we were moved there was also
another blunder by management, because the reason from the staff was that
they had moved us from there because they were worried about those
presses. The workers were going to come and sabotage the presses. This is
why we came here. But that was a very low time for us. It was very low if
I must tell the whole truth."

Latakgomo remembers other details of the strike: "When these guys went on
strike for whatever they went on strike, we went on a sympathy strike
that created a whole number of problems. These Cape guys then went back
to work, but the sympathy strike continued. I had meetings with the MD. I
went to Hal Miller. I said to Hal: 'Even taking into consideration the
difficulty of bowing to union demands, I believe there are legitimate
areas that need to be addressed.' All the sympathy strike did was
actually to bring to the fore a whole number of other grievances and
created the opportunity for people to say in addition to the sympathy
strike that there were also these issues. It required a response and I
actually said this to Hal Miller. I remember clearly when he said: 'What
makes you think I will give in to these guys?' I said: 'I am not
suggesting you give in. I am suggesting there may be a way of resolving
this.' It was the first time the company had experienced this kind of
thing. I had kept the paper going single-handedly. The last edition of
Post I produced singlehandedly. A 48 page paper. It was just me. I subbed
it and put it out. We had to publish one edition every 14 days or your
licence expired.

"In trying to save that, I actually produced a pamphlet with Post
Transvaal written on it, because there was no definition of what it
should look like. I produced it just to save the title. I was aware that
if that was closed down, because with the moderate approach, people said
if The World was closed and they allow this, it must be watered down.
There was a perception it was a watered down version of The World. I
actually produced the pamphlet. Then the government closed it down. We
went to court and the court found that the pamphlet could not reasonably
be construed as an edition of Post Transvaal. The government said: 'If
you try to start it up, we will close it down.' Then the Sowetan came."

Besides instances of discrimination and disputes with management, black
journalists felt themselves to be in many cases at a disadvantage. Pather
explains: "For a black person to be noticed, you had to outshine any
white man. In my own case, when I was nominated to take over as political
reporter. It was to cover the political parties. One had to cover the
provincial parliament and conventional politics. It took the editor a
long time to decide on my appointment. For the first time in the
province, a black political reporter would have to work with white
politicians. And also whether a black political reporter would be able to
work effectively with essentially white politicians. Whether white
politicians would feel comfortable. These were political aspects the
editor had to put his mind to. I take my hat off to him that he
eventually did agree to it, because for the first time a newspaper in
Natal had decided to take this step.

"In the beginning it was difficult. I had to deal on a daily basis. I
also noticed that some of the politicians felt uncomfortable. They
trusted a white person more easily than a black person. I think what was
to my advantage was that, whereas a white political reporter would have
leanings to one party or another, as a black person I had no sympathy for
any of those parties. So perhaps I was more impartial than the others."

Training is another sore point with black journalists. They feel not
nearly enough was done to assist them, especially as many had to make
their way in what was not their home language.

Latakgomo describes the problem: "I think the mainstream papers accepted
too easily the police version and it always left publications like The
World, the Sowetan, out on a limb, because they looked the odd man out,
and therefore there must be something wrong with their reporters. And in
addition to that, everyone spoke about the incompetence of black
reporters, their advocacy and their..."

Question - Were they incompetent?

- "I don't think incompetent in the gathering of news. They were good
news hounds and I would vouch for them. They would get the facts and the
information. I was news editor for a considerable time and I did a lot of
re-writing of some of the stuff that they brought in. English was their
second language."

Question - Was it because they were not properly trained?

- "I think it was because they weren't ... I was the first black
journalist to get on to the journalist cadet course. I can't remember
what year it was. I had been a journalist for seven years before I got
onto the programme and the reason I actually persisted was that I wanted
to make the point that I can cope with the programme. The truth of the
matter is that black journalists were never given the kind of training
they should have had. They were considered to be not up to scratch for
the cadet course, but at the same time no alternative programmes were
arranged. There was a programme that was subsequently run by Denis
Sutcliffe for the black guys only, but it wasn't the same type of thing.
Poor training, lack of training."

Question - Was there quite a serious problem within the company on the
whole attitude to black journalists?

- "I think so."

Question - Was it that the company was a white company and the black side
of it was only secondary?

- "Yeah, we were sort of poor cousins out there."

Question - With the Soweto riots, when the black journalists were getting
the good stories and white journalists weren't?

- "Even then what was happening was the black guys would get the stories
and feed in to some white journalist who would write the story. The
Allister Sparkses of this world sent these stories out to London, New
York, Tokyo under their by-lines. These international agencies employed
white guys to report on the story on Soweto and often they would report
that black journalists couldn't be objective because they were too close
to the story, which quite frankly was a lot of bull, because if they
wanted to slant the story in any way, they would slant it in the way in
which they gave it to the person who was going to write the story anyway.

"Because those white chaps were not going to get into the townships. So
it is really a matter of whether they trusted us. I think black
journalists suffered all ways. Poor training on the one side, pressures
from the community on the other side, pressures from the police on the
third front, so it wasn't as if they weren't trying to tell the story."

c) separate black editions

Separate black editions of papers were another sore point with certain
black journalists, although it created a number of jobs for black
journalists that they would not otherwise have had, and some black
journalists were actually quite happy with them.

Mathatha Tsedu, in his article in The Star on January 7 1997 supporting a
TRC investigation of the media, specifically mentions separate black
editions. He said the Rand Daily Mail had a black edition called Extra,
"meaning by inference that blacks were the extra readers".

The Sunday Times also had an Extra "which concentrated on lightning
strikes and witchcraft stories".

The Pretoria News had an extra edition, which was abolished with my
support, by then editor Wilf Nussey, but Mostert van Schoor reintroduced
a separate "Soccer" edition years later, which just changed the sport
pages to reflect blacks' greater interest in soccer, while the other
edition placed the emphasis on rugby to suit white readers.

I myself introduced a Metro edition to The Mercury during the 1990s as an
attempt to provide a paper in Natal that catered to black readers wanting
to read English.

The idea was that the Metro edition would try to establish a market for
black readers, and that the edition could possibly be hived off later as
a separate newspaper catering specifically for black interests. A change
of ownership at that time (1993) then led to the repositioning of The
Mercury as an upmarket newspaper, and the Metro edition was abandoned as
inappropriate for that market. It was decided then to expand the
Sowetan's circulation in Natal to cater for black readers wanting a paper
in English.

From this it is apparent that there are two ways of looking at special
editions for blacks. Some journalists, like Tsedu, regarded them as
apartheid editions, but in management and among other journalists they
were seen essentially as zoned editions aiming at specialist readerships.
There was no suggestion of inferiority or discrimination in news
selection, only special provision for specific reader interests in
certain sections of the paper.

Wylllie long resisted a special edition for Indian readers in the Sunday
Tribune, but changed his mind when the Sunday Times's metro edition in
Natal started making inroads into the Sunday Tribune's readership in
Chatsworth.This seemed to show that, besides the controversy in
journalistic ranks over whether or not special editions were apartheid
editions, targeted readers actually supported these editions and sought
them out. The argument rages on, with the Sunday Tribune more recently
again abandoning a special edition for Indian readers, and The Star
abandoning its extra edition under the editorship of Peter Sullivan.

Though differences of opinion are very evident, I do not see any human
rights abuse in the practice, merely a difference in marketing strategy.

No insult to any race was ever intended by these editions.





Section 9: Conclusions


1) Considerations of the commercial viability of the company - the need
to make profits, to relate especially to core market readers and to
attract advertisers - placed limitations on how far the Argus Company
could go in being a campaign implement against apartheid. It remained
first and foremost a newspaper chain and did not see its role as
primarily political. This may have blunted its cutting edge in exposing
all the wrongs of apartheid, including some human rights violations.

2) Apartheid, security and media laws and regulations proscribed or
restricted free news coverage of newsworthy, but politically sensitive,
subjects. This interfered with the function of a newspaper as a watchdog
of the people in an open democracy, making the Argus Company and their
staffs victims of human rights abuses in that respect.

3) Laws enforcing separation of different racial groups in many spheres
of life made free access to a full range of news sources more difficult.
The laws as such were an interference with human rights, making the
company a victim, but the company also made insufficient effort -
particularly in the earlier years of the period under review - to
overcome this obstacle.

4) Newspaper staffs were generally too white in most departments, and in
the critical editorial area, black staff began to be introduced on any
scale only during the 1970s. This was discriminatory in the staff
selection process, particularly as the company did not try to make the
target market for its newspapers the white community exclusively - in
spite of its historical roots.

5) Laws prevented black reporters from practising freely in large areas
of public life. This was a disincentive to newspapers employing them. In
this respect, both the company and black journalists were victims of
government-generated human rights abuses.

6) Besides apartheid, security and media laws, other legislation
affecting subjects that became politically sensitive seriously inhibited
the company's newspapers in generating relevant news. The laws included
nuclear matters, fuel supplies and transportation, defence matters,
police matters, prisons, key points and even the publication of trade
figures with certain countries. These obstacles amounted to a human
rights abuse affecting the general public and the newspapers that served
them.

7) Journalists were harassed and intimidated, arrested, detained and
sometimes prosecuted by police and other agents acting for the
government. Harassment and intimidation were also applied by agents of
the liberation struggle, to a degree where property damage, physical
injury and even lives were threatened. These actions by participants in
the political struggle for the control of power in South Africa were a
gross human rights violation on journalists. The violations even
overflowed into harassment and threats from individuals in the general
public.

8) Though objectivity was the aim of most of the company's newspapers,
proper balance to coverage of the political events was not achieved.
Imbalance in the racial complements of editorial staffs, judgements made
on white perceptions in news identification and newsgathering, and a
white monopoly of news selection in most sub-editors' rooms, caused some
distortion. In the company's black newspapers, a reverse situation
applied, made more obvious by the open commitment of staffs to the
liberation cause.

9) Political developments polarised emotions in society, and some of this
rubbed off on journalists, even though they tried to be objective. Black
journalists were affected by the many acts of oppression and brutality
applied to the black communities of the country. White journalists were
affected by the effects of liberation struggle strategies, which included
bombs in streets, shops, parking areas and restaurants, land mines on
country roads, sport and commercial boycotts, economic sanctions and
disinvestment campaigns etc. All these factors led to human rights abuses
on a such a scale that journalists themselves were victims of those
abuses.

10) The inherited situation of racial separation and separate communities
led to both black and white journalists being less interested in other
communities than in their own. With most of the company's papers being
mainly white, the concentration of news coverage was on white political
rivalries. Issues affecting blacks were at the heart of many of these
rivalries, causing them to be covered, but from the angle of white
decision-making. It was only late in the day that the imbalance in this
respect was rectified, as liberation movements became centre stage
players in the political drama. To the extent that the newspapers
cultivated attention to white political rivalries and overlooked full
coverage of black political aspirations and activities, the company
should regret the imbalance that occurred.

11) Black editorial staff members were employed on any scale only from
the 1970s, so were relatively junior just at the time when political
events made them the vital cogs in the newsgathering machine. They did
not immediately get promotion to recognise the vital role they were
filling. It is a matter the company should regret.

12) There was a lack of commercial incentive to pursue certain
black-interest subjects. Advertising support was more evident where white
interests were involved. Black readerships generally lagged white
readership, giving blacks a minority status in the company's main
newspapers. While this reflected market conditions, it was a distortion
of the overall national picture, and the newspapers perpetuated that
distortion.

13) Though the Press Council was established to prevent government
control of the press, it was set up under duress in the face of
government threats. It was often viewed as doing the government's dirty
work for it, making the industry partly responsible for its own
endangered plight, compromised by association with the oppressive
government. Not only was it disliked for this role, but it was not
representative of the whole South African population.

14) When editors eventually put their minds to avoiding and evading the
restrictions embodied in laws and regulations, many loopholes were found
enabling the press to do its job better. Efforts in this respect were
only made on any scale during the emergency regulations applied during
the second half of the 1980s. This meant the press languished under laws
it could possibly have evaded if efforts had been made earlier. Some
editors were less willing than others to test the limits of legal
restrictions the government imposed on the media. This situation meant
some human rights abuses were not addressed when they might have been.

15) A major problem in assessing culpability on human rights abuses
arises from the different agendas of liberal journalists as opposed to
liberationists.

16) There is friction over what were considered realistic political
rights for disfranchised groups. Argus company newspapers, while
steadfastly opposing apartheid, pursued gradualist goals within white
politics for many years before opting for constitutional settlement
through negotiation with all representative groups. This has led to
accusations that it kowtowed to apartheid.

17) The alternative press showed the Argus Company had to some extent
lost touch with the oppressed masses.

18) Participation in government news conferences, briefings, tours etc
subjected the company's newsgatherers to naked propaganda. Though this
was identified and countered to some extent, it was not always possible
to counter-balance such propaganda equally, because of lack of sufficient
access and contacts with liberation movements.

19) The company applied the government's petty apartheid laws on its
premises, and this was broken down in some cases only by black
disobedience action in the face of abuse from other company employees.

20) The company's newspapers for many years followed the practice of
publishing the names only of white accident victims, while mentioning
black accident victims as statistics. This was discriminatory.

21) Argus management appeared not to trust black editors with full
editorial responsibility for their newspapers. While this appears to have
been done to protect the business from threat of government closure (and
closure did occur more than once), it was a paternalistic practice that
caused bitterness among black journalists, who did not feel they were
being treated fairly.

22) Salaries of black journalists were for some time lower than for white
journalists doing the same level of work, and facilities on black
newspapers were inferior to those at the company's "white" newspapers.
While these facts may have stemmed from commercial considerations, they
gave rise to a feeling that black journalists were treated as "poor
cousins".

23) Management handling of the strike on Post Transvaal - the threat to
call in the police, and refusal to consider concessions - caused much
bitterness among black staff, which rankles to this day.

24) Blacks feel insufficient efforts were made by the company to improve
their performance through proper training.


===========================================================================


