	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 25.03.1997		NAME: 	SINUKA JALI

DAY: 2			 	AREA:	LUSIKISIKI

----------------------------------------------------------REV GABULA
OPENED WITH A PRAYER.

MS MAYA: On this second morning, the 25 March 1997 I am going to read out
a list for the Human Rights Violations Committee, the list that we have
today. We are going to listen to 43 people. We are going to finish off
what we started yesterday in connection with the struggle in Pondoland.

	We have 34 people for today. We will start with today's programme and
finish off with yesterday's list.

We have nine people from Lusikisiki. I will read today's list. I am going
to read the person's name who will be testifying, then the victim. These
people were ill-treated or tortured because they were ANC members. Most
of them were detained. After they were released they were in such ill
health that they passed away.

	We have Percy Ncanyiewe Myezo, who will be talking about Mtanyini Myezo;
Sinuka Jali and Mngqungelwa Jali who will be talking about Sovumase Jali;
Cetyiwe Pila who will be talking about April Pika; Naniwe Mary Maribela
Ndizimela who will be talking about Zofonia Ndzimela; Ntombikayise Nxulu
who will be talking about Mathopisi Siqakaza; Nontombi Bhasayi Makwaba
who will talking about Simon Bhasayi Makwaba; Nopopi Mantola Majinga who
will be talking about Bangumzi Majinga; Ndabazipheli Myekwa Qwathekana
who will be talking about himself; Mjwenjwe Twenty Joyi who will be
talking about himself; Fanele Lungu who will be

talking about himself; Gxakela Mabandla who would be talking about
himself; Nofuduka Eleanor Mamjoli Xhakana who will be talking about
Shomboto Xhakana; Noquiquizela Macebisa Ngqupaza who will be talking
about Makulana Khatshwa; Makwitshe Nancy Mqatshi who will be talking
about Bulelani Sivuyile Mqatshi; Kintana Mbekwa who will be talking about
Mbekwa Sibunu; Manzala Dingumhlaba who will be talking about Magwabule
Nzala; Gladys Nonzwakazi Danga who will be talking about Goliath Danga;
Nkosiplhendule Nakwa who will be talking about Mzayifana Alfred Nakwa;
Nqeke Fani who will be talking about himself; Mlandelwa Fani who will be
talking about himself; Noni Mabhala Gcaba who will be talking about
himself and James Notununu; Nobawo Mildred Mdlamla who will be talking
about Bambaliphi Mdlamla; Ngwazi Sipolo who will be talking about
himself; Ndovela Nxasana who will be talking about himself; Theophilus
Ndluvo Bongaza who will be talking about himself; Nosipo Dorothea
Somdizela who will be talking about Skinkili Moyiswa; Agness Mamsareni
Magawana who will be talking about Barnabas Mhlati Magawana; Daliwe
Mgulwa who will be talking about Marelane Mgulwa; Mapota Peter Mjanyelwa
who will be talking about Mjanyelwa Mnconco; Gingiliza Mamsakazweni
Mkhathi who will be talking about Yiva Ndiseni; Matshingelana Cambana who
will be talking about Gavu Zadunge; Penelope Madikizela who will be
talking about Solomon Madikizela; Siwewe Mamtabasa Ngakanani who will be
talking about Nohlaza Ngakani Jakada; and Poyinda Nagi who will be
talking about himself.

	From yesterday we have Mavis Gazula; Bekabantu Qalanyobe; Nelson
Jinineka. In the afternoon we will

have Eliot Skhosana who will be talking about himself, his house was
burnt down in Lusikisiki in 1993; Nomgwen Mancancini who would be talking
about himself, his house was also burnt down; Sipho Jackson Phangomso who
will also be talking about himself - these people were of the same
incidents, same area.

	Then there are those of the 1989 incident: Livingstone Siphelo Sapo who
will be talking about himself, somebody tried to kill him; Velile Ngcamla
who will be talking about himself, attempted murder; Nokuzola Phillip who
will be talking about Fikile Phillip; Tshitshi Ndlazi who will be talking
about himself; Simlindile Mabana who will be talking about himself; and
Mandlekosi Tambodala who will be talking about himself, somebody tried to
murder him. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRMAN: Thank you Miss Maya.

	I request that we proceed as follows: The next two hours we are going to
focus on an issue that we dealt with yesterday. I will request that the
witnesses who will be talking about the Ngquza incident... We are going
to give them the first two hours. We will try to not to dwell on this
because we gave it ample attention yesterday, therefore I am requesting
that the witnesses of the Ngquza incident... I will not thank them
immediately. After they have testified I will thank them after the whole
programme.

	Percy Ncanyiwe Myezo is he here? Sinuka Jali and Mngqungelwa Jali;
Cetyiwe Eleanor Pika; Naniwe Mary Maribela Ndzimela. Please come forward.

ADV SANDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. To save time, I am going
to ask the witnesses questions so that



what has already been documented may be clearer.

	We will start with Mr Sinuka Jali. Mr Jali who are going to be talking
about?

SINUKA JALI: (sworn states)

MR JALI: I am going to talk about Sovumase Jali.

ADV SANDI: The three of you will be talking about people who had been
detained, beaten up, injured and after their release they were so ill of
health that they soon died. Is that so?

MR JALI: Yes, that is so.

ADV SANDI: How are you related to Savumase?

MR JALI: He is my father.

ADV SANDI: According to your statement you say that he was detained after
people had been shot at Ngquza.

MR JALI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: And then he was beaten up by people?

MR JALI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: I realise that you have requested that there be a tombstone
erected in memory of the people that were killed. Is that so?

MR JALI: Yes, it is so.

ADV SANDI: Is there something that you would like to add to your request
in connection with the tombstone?

MR JALI: No. The Committee will see what they can do for me. I have no
other request.

ADV SANDI: When did your father pass away? Was it in 1967?

MR JALI: The Committee will forgive me because I do not remember well. I
am not educated, but he died six years after he had been beaten up and
terribly injured.

ADV SANDI: Is that all, Mr Jali? You say he died six

years after the Ngquza incident.

MR JALI: When I estimate he died on a Friday, the fifth year after the
incident.

ADV SANDI: How was he injured?

MR JALI: His ribs had been injured. He was beaten on his back and he was
coughing blood.

ADV SANDI: Did he die after that?

MR JALI: Yes, he would bring up blood. He would vomit blood.

ADV SANDI: Is that all Mr Jali?

MR JALI: Yes Sir.

ADV SANDI: Thank you.

	------------------------





































