	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	26-03-1997	NAME:	RODNEY G. KESWA

CASE: LUSIKISIKI

DAY 3



CHAIRMAN:	Rodney Goba Keswa, please come forward. We welcome you General
Keswa, thank you for coming to the Commission to give evidence. We will
hand over to Reverend Xundu to swear you in.

RODNEY GOBA KESWA:(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Properly sworn in Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON:	... that the statement of Brigadier Keswa was read, sorry by
General Keswa was read by our staff to include no perpetrator, but
closely to look at it now, there is an indication that there may be
mention of perpetrators. We have agreed with General Keswa that in his
testimony, he will not mention the names of perpetrators, they will be on
record, because they have not been informed, according to Section 13 of
the Act.

	By agreement between him and ourselves, he is going to go ahead and make
his testimony. I wish to place that on record of our proceedings. Thank
you Ntsiki Sandi.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you. General Keswa, I am going to ask you questions so
that we can - when I look at your complaint in 1981 you were arrested and
detained by the Security Police in Transkei, after allegations have been
made about you. What were you doing at the time, General?

MR KESWA:	I was the leader of the Transkei Defence Force.

ADV SANDI:	I will hand over to you so that you can tell us what happened.

MR KESWA:	Yes. I have written, I have a submission, I don't know whether
I can read it as is?

ADV SANDI:	You can read it General.

MR KESWA:	I am a retired Civil Servant residing at Ibotha Farm, Umzimkulu
District. On the 27th of May, 1981, during my tour of duty as Commander
of the Transkei Defence Force, I was arrested and detained in terms of
Transkei Security Laws.

	I was subjected to the most sadistic and dehumanising treatment
imaginable. My arrest was reported on the front page of the Sunday Times
of 31 May, 1981. As I will for the first time today give the background
to my arrest and torture in detention, it will become clear how nefarious
the role which was played by some newspapers in their disinformation
campaign to justify the violation of human rights, in the South Africa of
the past.

	Some of the things written about me in that front page report of the
Sunday Times, are distortions of the truth apparently aimed at justifying
to the general public, my arrest and detention.

	I pray that this Commission will find time also to look into the
reporting of the newspapers, such as the Sunday Times, during the
apartheid years.

	After my arrest, I was detained in the police cells in Inqobo. The cell
in which I was locked up, had no lights and had a dreadful stench which
at times made me sick.

ADV SANDI:	General, please pardon me - do you have a copy of this article
that you are referring to?

MR KESWA:	I do, I do have a copy.

ADV SANDI:	Can you please furnish us with a copy? Do you have a copy for
yourself?

MR KESWA:	I need a copy please. I don't have one on my file, I need a
copy of that, if you could make a copy for yourselves, please.

ADV SANDI:	Will you be referring to this article as you are giving your
talk?

MR KESWA:	Yes.

ADV SANDI:	You will be referring to this article?

MR KESWA:	Yes.

ADV SANDI:	We will just go through it very quickly and give it back to
you, so that when you have to refer to it, you will be able to do so,
thank you.

MR KESWA:	Thank you. The afternoon of the 27th May, 1981, marked in most
parts of Transkei the beginning of an unseasonal snow storm which was
accompanied by gusts of wind and torrential rain. Snow fell on hills and
mountains, where for years it had not fallen before.

	It was bitterly cold at Inqobo. As I groped around in my dark cell,
looking for the prison mat and blankets, I felt an icy gust of wind which
I thought came in through an open window.

	As I tried to find the window, I discovered the window with no glass. As
the snow storm intensified, it blew into my cell through this window,
sprays of rain and ice. I tried to shield myself from the rain the wind
and the snow, by squatting directly below the glassless window, but the
gusts of wind which came in through the window, hit the opposite wall and
spiralled inside the cell in a whirlwind which blew up choking dust as it
also crept up inside my trousers.

	Slowly but surely first my toes froze, then my ankles. As the numbness
crept up my legs, I spent the night rubbing

vigorously with my hands, my hands or jogging around and around inside my
cell in an effort to wipe off the cold.

	When the cocks crowed for the first time, I was so cold my legs so
wobbly, that it was difficult for me to move around my cell. When the
birds began to chirp and sing, I was still making attempts to prevent my
body from freezing.

	When dawn eventually broke, I had the first opportunity of looking
around my cell. What I saw still haunts me to this day. The wall on the
one side of my cell was smeared with faeces, the spot where the night
soil bucket stood, was a pool of urine.

	The metal night soil bucket was old and rusty, it obviously had never
been cleaned in years. The blankets were old, threat bare, smelly, dusty,
coarse with tell tale signs of perverse sexual acts. I tried walking
towards the door, but I staggered about sick to the bottom of my gut.

	I crest to the floor and hit my back against the iron grill door. I
wanted to scream or shout, but I could not because my voice was hoarse.

	As I pulled myself up from the floor by holding onto the iron bars of
the iron grill door, I remembered stories I heard when I served in the
South African Prison Services about tactics of killing someone without
laying a finger on them.

	This was it, I concluded. This was such a tactic to kill me. I resolved
there and then that I would not die that way. Whoever wanted me dead,
would have to kill me physically. With a peculiar and to me familiar
clang and rattle of prison keys, the door of my cell swung open. All I
saw was a hand, shovelling into my cell a dish of prison mealie porridge
for breakfast. I almost dived for the dish,

not to eat the porridge, but to use it to warm my legs.

	The porridge was ice cold. Later that morning I was led out of my cell
to the offices of the Security Police. I was staggering all over the
place because my legs were numb. The Security Police Officer who had come
to see me, gave me some paper and pen and ordered me to write down the so
called charges against me as he dictated them.

	My fingers could not hold the pen, the were stiff with cold. The police
officer asked me to warm my hands at his paraffin heater. As I did so, my
hands hurt like hell. Eventually I wrote down the charges as dictated to
me.

	There were about 20 and they ranged from accusing me of being a
terrorist, a communist, a traitor of being against the institution of
Chieftainship in Transkei, of having travelled overseas meeting Russian
Generals and other such ridiculous nonsense.

	The Security Police Officer advised that I respond in writing to each
allegation and that - for good measure gave me some more paper to write
my "confession" and to plead for forgiveness so that I could be released
soon from detention.

	I was returned to my cell. Later the same day I was moved to the police
cells in Tsolo. At Tsolo I was locked up in a cell behind which was the
station's diesel electric generator. Every day after sunset, the diesel
generator was started up and its noise made sleeping very difficult for
me.

	This was obviously another attempt to disorientate me by denying me
sleep and perhaps cause me to confess and "I could be released from
detention."

	The blankets I was given at Tsolo were infested with lice of all sizes,
big ones, small ones. I reported this to

my guards and requested to be allowed to purchase insecticide from my own
pocket to kill the lice. I was laughed at.

	I was denied ablution facilities for two months. For two months I
couldn't even wash my face, let alone have a bath. I was given "food"
worth 45 cents a day, that is I was allowed 15 cents worth of food each
of the three meals per day.

	In contravention of Transkei's own Security Laws, I was kept locked up
24 hours per day, I was denied the prescribed half hour's exercise in the
open, before and after midday each day, as required by Transkei's own
legislation at the time. As was to be visited at least once a month by a
Magistrate and or a senior police officer, to ascertain my wellbeing in
detention, this was not done.

	After two months, my endurance crumbled. The cold cement floor, the lack
of exercise in the open, the loneliness, the brutality of it all took its
toll. I had suffered from haemorrhoids before my detention. In detention
the piles got worse and started to bleed.

	At one stage I passed out and came to in Dr Mbekweni's consulting rooms.
I don't know how I got there, but after the doctor had treated me, I was
returned to my cell. One night during July 1981 I noticed that all the
doors of my cell were not locked.

	The wind was blowing rather strongly and the doors were banging on their
frames as they swayed on their hinges. I got up and tested the doors,
indeed, they were not locked. Immediately I recognised the trap for what
it was - an attempt to lure me out of my cell and ambush me as I walked
out.

	I would then have been shot "while trying to escape from custody", and
that would have been the end of my life.

	I stayed in my cell till the following morning and told my guards about
the clumsy attempt to lure me to my death. After I had been interrogated
several times by the Security Police, it became obvious that the
so-called terrorist, communist charges against me, would not stick. A
fresh set of criminal charges ranging from theft of use of a Government
vehicle, mark not theft of a Government vehicle, theft of use of a
Government vehicle to fraud, were trumped up against me.

	These also failed and eventually I was acquitted by the Supreme Court in
Umtata. To understand and see it in its proper prospective, this sordid
and manifestly evil campaign, I would like to give the Commission a
background of a series of incidents which culminated in my eventual
detention.

	Incidents which earned me the attention of the Security Police in both
South Africa and Transkei, the first incident I want to refer to: some
time after the Sharpville massacre, the leader of the PAC was imprisoned
in the then Potgieter Street Prison in Pretoria, where I worked as a
young prison warder. Because meals given to Black prisoners were the most
inferior in South African prisons, it was mostly mealie pap or incubi,
boiled mealies, we - I and together with other youngsters at the time,
worked out a scheme of swapping Sobokwe's midday meal of boiled mealies
for mealie rice which was a ration given only to Coloureds and Indians.

	This swapping of meals was discovered, unfortunately for us by White
warders and reported to the authorities.

	Secondly, when the ANC leadership was rounded up

through out South Africa and sent to Pretoria for detention, Chief
Lethuli, then President of the ANC, was on his admission to prison
assaulted by a White prison warder - one Gouws, whom the Transvaal
Attorney General refused to prosecute for the assault.

	This refusal did not go down well with particularly the Zulu speaking
prison warders, who were in the majority of Black personnel at the
prisons' barracks where we stayed.

	We the youngsters in this group, tried to persuade those of the Zulu
personnel who had witnessed the assault to go to the police and make
sworn statements.

	These attempts leaked out and as I was among the group that was branded
agitators.

	Thirdly, whenever opportunity presented itself at that Pretoria Prison,
we smuggled coal from where it was stored inside the prison, to a small
kitchen in the section of the prison where ANC detainees including our
present State President, were kept.

	This enabled the detainees to prepare their food brought to them from
outside the prison. Again, our smuggling activities were discovered.

	Fourthly in the 60's, I registered with the University of South Africa
for the Bachelor of Arts Degree. I was then the first Black member in the
history of the South African Prison Service to do so. One of my majors
was a discipline called Native Administration.

	Among the recommended works for study were books such as The Reverend
Nabaningi Sithole's book, African Nationalism and Chief A.J. Lethuli's
book Let My People Go.

	This field of study earned me the wroth of the South African Security
Police. My residence was raided and

searched on numerous occasions.

	Fifth, just before the Transkei State was created, I was transferred
from South Africa to Transkei. After my arrival in Umtata, I was
approached by the then Head of BOSS. BOSS, was the Bureau of State
Security in Transkei, a certain Mr Brown, who tried to recruit me to join
BOSS with a promise that eventually I would be its head in Transkei.

	I refused the offer and I am positive BOSS did not take kindly to my
refusal. In March 1978 I was transferred from the Transkei Prison Service
to the Transkei Defence Force as its Commander. Within a matter of two or
so months of my assumption of command of the TDF, the Transkei Government
broke diplomatic relations with South Africa.

	This left the Transkei Defence Force in a quandary. We could not train
our soldiers in South Africa, neither could be obtain military stores, we
had to look elsewhere for training and ordnance, ordnance being military
stores. I had to design and launch a strategic plan to seek help from the
international community.

	I labelled this strategy plan code "Operation Lullaby". Now each letter
in that Lullaby stands for a specific purpose, which I will gladly
explain if you so request. Operation Lullaby was amazingly successful.

	I want to pause here and say what I am going to say next might just have
international repercussions, is the first the very first time I disclose
it. Transkei soldiers were trained by the United Nations Organisation.

	They are living examples, I sent them to the United Nations on Transkei
passports and the attended courses there and they came back with
certificates bearing the United

Nations Code of Arms.

	I was able to send for training in other countries my officers and men
and I was also able to purchase in a variety of countries overseas,
military stores. This success did not endear me to the Security Police in
South Africa and Transkei and neither did it win me friends in the
Transkei Public Service.

	Seventh, after the break in diplomatic relations between South Africa
and Transkei, both NATO through the United States of America and the
Warshaw Pact Countries through Poland, showed an interest in Transkei's
coast line.

	The Poles sought the TDF's assistance to obtain permission from the
Transkeian authorities to operate a ship along Transkei's coast, "to
study fish shoals". We assisted the Poles and the permission was granted.

	The Americans were keen on recommissioning a Second World War landing
strip at Msikaba - they spoke to me about this and before we could ...
(tape ends) ... over sensitive areas in South Africa, with cameras fixed
on its belly, the persons concerned were declared non grata in South
Africa, and were repatriated to the USA.

	This was the end of the American interest in Transkei's coast line.
Again these operations were picked up by the Security Police and they did
not endear me to the Security establishments in South Africa and Transkei.

	Early in 1980 Intelligence reports warned me of my impending detention
because when the Transkei Defence Force was established in 1975, sons of
Chiefs in the first intake of recruits to form the nucleus of the
Transkei Defence Force, were promised that only them would in future
command the Transkei Defence Force. Surely as things turned out

after my detention and removal from the Transkei Defence Force, only the
princes in Transkei and in the Defence Force have succeeded one another
as Commander of the TDF.

	Finally, when I was detained, the Black officer who had succeeded as the
Head of BOSS had become Commissioner of Transkei Police and Head of the
Transkei Security Police when I was detained.

	After my acquittal by the Supreme court in Umtata, I instructed a firm
of attorneys to suit the Transkei Government for the blatantly illegal
things it did to me while I was in detention.

	In stead the Transkei Government passed legislation to indemnify itself
from such action. I could not do anything more. It is my submission
Chairperson, and your Honourable members, that jointly of severally the
nine incidents I have mentioned, amongst numerous others, convinced the
powers that were in Transkei that I deserved this most abominable and
vicious sadism that I was made to endure.

	I believed in 1976 and still believe today, that the politics of the
proponents of separate development did not reduce the people of Transkei
to sub-humans or lesser people, we deserved a place in the sun that
shines over all the peoples of the earth. Operation Lullaby proved this
point of view if proof were needed.

	But because of my dedication to the service of my people, because of my
unswerving loyalty to them, I now know the pain, the grief, the anguish
and the agony of such loyalty.

	I also request this Commission to assist me recover those things the
Security Police seized from me when I was detained. I had newspaper
cuttings which I pasted on empty

file covers, particularly newspapers of cuttings of members of the old
South African Police pointing their revolvers at gym dressed school
children, the police were pointing revolvers at school children who were
wearing gym dresses during the 1976 Soweto riots. I also had a newspaper
cutting showing Hechter Petersen being carried away after he had been
shot by the police.

	I also had a collection of flags I had collected during my tours
overseas which I had provided with a nice stand. I used to hoist this in
my office and these were also taken.

	I would like them returned to me please.

	And that this Commission must investigate who the person was who ordered
my detention. That person must appear before it to explain why I was
detained and treated in this sub-human manner.

	I feel very bitter about what was done to me and the experience still
haunts me to this day. I thank you.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you General. I thought you were going to explain about
the Lullaby to us. Maybe you've missed that point.

MR KESWA:	The first "L", sir stands for let. "U", stands for us. The
second "L", stand for listen, the second "L" stands for learn. "A" stands
for ask, the last "BY" stands for buy. In other words sir, as we were
people who had no way to be educated we decided to go out to other
countries so that we can learn and ask and listen. Ask and listen.

	After that we would buy whatever we wanted to buy. We did so, we bought
things in these countries, we learnt new things in these countries, we
learnt by asking and by listening, thank you.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you General. Maybe my colleagues are

going to ask you questions, but for now I will hand over to the
Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON:	Reverend Xundu?

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Except for the allegations you've
mentioned, and that you mentioned that you were helping Lethuli and
others, in your tours are there any people you suspect maybe they told
the Government that you are trying to overthrow it?

MR KESWA:	Honourable sir, what surprised me is that when the police, the
Security Police arrived in Inqobo, telling me to write down the
allegations, these allegations were connected with the trips I had
overseas.

	Sometimes I wouldn't even tell my wife when I was taking these trips,
even my assistant wouldn't know because we knew that we were from
Transkei and we were not welcome in other countries, due to political
reasons.

	But I thought that there were people amongst the Defence Force who took
the things that I did and they accused me of trying to overthrow the
Transkei Government, that is why I ask or request the Commission to bring
forward the person who gave orders for me to be detained.

CHAIRMAN:	General, ... which by your own admission is coming to light for
the first time, I am not aware of ever hearing it or reading about it
anywhere and indeed it is a surprising revelation. What I want to know is
the statement relates of course to the training of Transkei soldiers by
the United Nations Organisation. I would like to ask two questions.

	The UN is known to have played a major role in galvanising the countries
of the world against apartheid and especially against the creation of
(indistinct), I find

it very difficult to understand exactly what logic the UN used to
actually train soldiers for the Transkei. We are running after
revelations of the truth and it will be very interesting just to hear the
year in which this happened and how the UN was persuaded to take this
position.

MR KESWA:	Honourable Chairperson, I hope one day God will spare me to
write a book about this incidents. I don't want to pretend it wasn't, it
was easy, it wasn't a piece of cake.

	I will just say it took old fashioned strategy planning. The boys I
sent, let me disclose, to Geneva in Switzerland to train, trained with
other boys and other youngsters from all the parts of the world. I
believed through my studies and through my general interest in
international affairs that the United Nations must champion the cause of
the underdog.

	I took politics out of it and talked to people as human beings and it
worked. Thank God it worked. Those boys are still alive, they have their
certificates. They are the only ones in South Africa with United Nations
certificates, and for good measure, I sent them to Switzerland on
Transkei passports. I did it.

CHAIRMAN:	Mr Sandi. Thank you for that answer, General. Mr Sandi?

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairman. General, earlier on when you started,
you made a reference to this Sunday Times newspaper cutting and
apparently you were going to bring our attention to certain parts of it,
would you like to do it now?

MR KESWA:	Yes. Yes, please. There is a paragraph there which says I
travelled extensively overseas, studying penal

systems. If you look at that article, that is a blatant distortion of the
truth. I travelled extensively overseas studying, military systems. I was
not wanting to learn about prisons, I had already stopped working for
prisons, I don't know what I was going to do about that.

	... to discredit my achievements and there is another allegation that I
wrote a book Outlawed Communities, I never wrote a book. That was a
manuscript I wrote whilst I was still in the Prison Service, studying as
a student of the University of South Africa. I was interested in prison
gang warfare and I got permission from the South African Prison's
authorities to conduct that research and I published a manuscript which
incidentally was serialised by the Sunday Times, but I never wrote a book.

	And there is also an allegation there that I was arrested because of ANC
activities which were banned in South Africa and in Transkei. The fact of
the matter was that I was branded a communist, I was branded a traitor, I
was branded someone who hated Chiefs and Chieftainship.

	I assumed because there is an alliance between the ANC and the South
African Communist Party. Anyone who is a communist, therefor is anti-ANC
or things like that. But those allegations, they are distortions.

ADV SANDI:	Are you able to remember some of the countries you visited
whilst you were abroad?

MR KESWA:	Yes. I went to Belgium, I went to Turkey, I went to Switzerland
several times, I went to Austria, I went to the UK, Italy, Israel, I
spent some time there. I went to Kenya, I went to Zimbabwe. Those are the
ones that come to mind.

ADV SANDI:	I suppose in all these countries you would

meet people from the army or Heads or state. How far would you be from
those people, people who were the politicians of the countries concerned?

MR KESWA:	Not directly. I would go to a country and seek intermediaries,
a connection, to try and establish a link with the military of that
country. I didn't go directly, for instance to Austria and went to the
Commander of the Austrian Defence Force, I couldn't do that, because of
the politics.

	Every time I had to try and get the politics out of it and meet the
people behind the politics.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you General.

CHAIRMAN:	General, thank you very much. We can have you for the whole day
and get quite a lot, but we don't have the time to do that today.

	We thank you for sharing with us a very profound submission to the
Commission. Apart from the unique revelations that you have shared with
the Commission today, you have confirmed a number of things which many
other people had been saying to us.

	The question of newspapers and how they were reporting events, we are -
you will be interested to know that we will be having a hearing which
will be focusing on the media and what the media's role was in this
period that we are investigating.

	Because they like to pose now as custodians of our democracy but you are
sharing with us some very concrete events of misinformation.

	You have shared with us conditions in prison and your particular
quotation of a tactic of killing someone without laying your hands on him
- a number of people will confirm

what you have shared with us.

	You have shared with us something which I think is unique, how the
regime violated its own laws in the process of its repression so that
they would create conditions of how people should be treated in prison
and continued to violate it, have it in the statute but not implement it,
go against it.

	And of course how the regime attempted to co-opt you to the bureau of
State Security. These are very interesting revelations which you have
shared with us, apart from many others that of course we are hearing for
the first time.

	We wish to thank you very much for this testimony and we convey to you
our sincere sympathy on the fact that on your way to here, you had an
accident just as the gate here. We went to see your car just now and we
saw how badly it is smashed. We hope that you will be able to get it
fixed and we are very sorry.

	Thank you General, and you can stand down.

MR KESWA:	Thank you, sir.

	--------------------

