
	1	S KETSE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: SYLVIA VUYELWA KETSE

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Our next witness will be Sylvia Vuyelwa Ketse.

SYLVIA VUYELWA KETSE: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Ms Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela is going to lead you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Thank you Chairperson. We greet you Sylvia. How do
you feel?	

MS KETSE: I am fine, thank you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: I see something here in your statement which was
not here before, where you mention that this Rastafarian guy kept on
coming to the people and would then go back to the police and then you
heard them calling out to shoot. The Rasta went to the police then came
back to us and he talked to the people in the front then he again went
back to the police van and then came to us once more and then there was a
policeman who gave instructions that they should shoot to death. Was this
policemen talking on a load speaker?

MS KETSE: No, he was just speaking ordinarily.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: So, at what stage were you shot?

MS KETSE: That is the time when I was shot, I saw people at UITENHAGE
HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	S KETSE

first falling down and I could make out that people were being shot and
falling down and as I was trying to run away I saw Blaauw who had fallen
down and he had already been shot. Then I jumped over him and I ran and
the policemen were chasing us and some men came and they said I had been
hit and they should take me, so they lifted me and the policemen came and
they hit me on the head but they did not actually hurt me.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Where are your bullet wounds?

MS KETSE: They are here on my head. I have got 14 bullet wounds and 2 on
the head and even at the back.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Were these big bullet wounds, or were these small,
were you hit by pellets?

MS KETSE: Yes, I saw one pellet.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: So you were taken to Dr Mzimba?

MS KETSE: No, we were taken to a house in no.15 and then a certain car
came to fetch us and took us to Dr Mzimba's surgery.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: So is it there where these pellets were taken out?

MS KETSE: These men were going to take these out, then they decided not
to because they saw the police coming.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: This taking out of bullets and pellets, was it a
usual practice in the location?

MS KETSE: No, I had never seen it before. It was going to be the first of
this kind, but they did not actually do it because they got scared of the
police because the police were raiding the house in search of all the
victims.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Now could you explain to us how you were affected
by this injury, health wise?

MS KETSE: My hand does not work. I am a hawker and when it UITENHAGE
HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	S KETSE

is extremely cold I can't go and sell and now it is even two months that
I have not been going. I have got three children and they are of school
going age but I cannot manage to keep them there, I am not even getting
any grant.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Which hand is this?

MS KETSE: It is my left hand side, that is the hand that was shot.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Do you perhaps have any requests that you would
like to say to this Commission?

MS KETSE: I am going to ask this government that they should educate my
children and also give me some subsistence of some kind.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Thank you Chairperson, we are sorry for the
interruption.

	You were still on the floor explaining to us, how you got affected from
the injuries you sustained and also your wishes for this Commission.

MS KETSE: I was saying that ever since I got shot I can no longer work
and use my hand. I am a hawker and on cold days I can not go there. Then
that brings suffering and I have three children, so I am asking the
government to educate these children.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: How old are they?

MS KETSE: The oldest is 18 and he is doing Std.10. The next is 15 years
old and he is doing Std.2. The youngest is 9 years old and he is in Sub.A.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Do they look up to you?

MS KETSE: Yes, they are my dependents.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Is there any other wish you perhaps have which you
would like to say to this Commission?

MS KETSE: No, I haven't got any other thing to say, thank

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	S KETSE

you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Thank you Ms Ketse.

--------------------







