	1	M KHAULELA


	1	M KHAULELA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	12.08.1996	NAME:	MVULA KHAULELA

CASE:	JB01056/02PS 	-	PRETORIA

DAY 1

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: The next witness. Mr Khaulela, before you finally make
yourself comfortable in the chair, will you please stand and raise your
right hand.

MVULA KHAULELA: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. You may be seated. Mrs Sooka will
assist you again here or, again, Mrs Sooka will be assisting you now in
giving your evidence. Can you hear the translation?

MR KHAULELA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: As I am speaking to you. Then I am handing the chair to her.

MS SOOKA: Mr Khaulela, thank you for coming to the Commission. You are
going to tell us about your father. Will you tell us a little bit about
your father and then about the disappearance please.

MR KHAULELA: Yes, the only thing that I can say about his disappearance
is the information I got as late as 1983 when I was still in exile. I got
this through our National Commissioner. Then National Commissioner, Mr
Masondo. In fact he himself told me that he got that information and they
as the ANC were still looking into it, that is investigating the matter.

MS SOOKA: Sorry. Do you want to tell us, you know, what your father did
and how it came to be that he went missing

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	M KHAULELA

before you get onto what you have learnt about it.

MR KHAULELA: The only thing I can tell you about my father. He was an
activist in the ANC. He was also a former Robben Island and without doubt
he was still continuing with the struggle and I left him in 1977 two
years after he has been released from Robben Island.

MS SOOKA: Carry on.

MR KHAULELA: Yes. As I said earlier on it was then 1983 when I heard
about him, but just before I heard that he was once in Lesotho. Well, on
a working visit, just mention it and he did meet our then National
Commissioner asking to see me, but unfortunately I was busy also
somewhere. Then he could not meet me.

MS SOOKA: Who actually informed you about what happened to him then?

MR KHAULELA: As to what happened to him, the first person, as I have
mentioned, that is Mr Andrew Masondo. He did not make mention of what
happened in actual fact, but he made mention of his disappearance. Later
on because he promised me that they are going to investigate this matter,
I was visited once more by the late Chris Hani and the present Minister
of Sport, Steve Tshwete, whom I think they were the people who were
inside the country within, I mean about this matter. So that is why the
late Chris Hani brought him to me, but at that stage, also, there was
nothing so far attended.

	Also, I cannot remember some people, but there were people also who were
mentioned. I believe through the investigation there is another side of
the story now that he was last seen boarding a flight from Maseru to
Johannesburg, but inbetween came up two or three from the Special Branch.
PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	M KHAULELA

On board they just picked on a man, it was a description and that
description came into my father's description because the person who was
on board on that same flight did not know my father, but because he was
to be destined on the same airport, that is Jan Smuts. After he has been
asked, I mean, by the people who were waiting for my father, he then
described that, no, there was somebody whom he did not know who was
picked up by three Special Branches or two Special Branches. That is now
not Jan Smuts. I believe in Bloemfontein.

MS SOOKA: In your statement you say that this information that you have
just told us you learnt that, that was disclosed by Curtis Nkondo?

MR KHAULELA: This is the story. Not from him direct.

MS SOOKA: Right.

MR KHAULELA: Yes, correct.

MS SOOKA: So, did Chris Hani tell you that?

MR KHAULELA: No, no, that is why I am saying I do not remember who told
me that, but I would like also Curtis Nkondo to be approached about this.

MS SOOKA: Have you, you mention that this was as far back as 1985, but
since then ...

MR KHAULELA: Latest information that was in 1985.

MS SOOKA: Since then have you approached Shell House, have you approached
the people there to find out if they have got anymore information for you?

MR KHAULELA: Yes, I did it on my own. It is part and parcel of the people
working and one of the people I did approach, the very same Dakotie, I
met him also concerning this matter as somebody who knew about such
activities.

MS SOOKA: What were you able to learn?

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	M KHAULELA

MR KHAULELA: From him? So far, well, according to his response, he was
innocent in this matter. As far as he knew about these activities, he
referred to try and also he promised me that he is going to, what you
call, he would investigate also the matter. Especially from the Eastern
Cape people, that is his former colleagues.

MS SOOKA: Has he ever come back to you?

MR KHAULELA: No, no, never came back.

MS SOOKA: What do you know about what your fathers political activities
were about?

MR KHAULELA: Unfortunately, because when he was arrested I was still
young by then, but from the people who grew up with him, what I can say
from his colleagues or whatever, he was an activist and he, apparently,
he did undergo military training somewhere in Africa. I am sure this took
place after he came back to South Africa when he was arrested.

MS SOOKA: I see from your statement that you yourself are now a solider
employed with the Defence Force. How old were you when your father went
missing?

MR KHAULELA: When I, let me say it like this. I left him. Then I was 19
years old when I left. It was long before he is missing because then I
got the story he got missing in 1983 and I left in 1977.

MS SOOKA: Did you also join MK?

MR KHAULELA: I was in MK. Now I am a soldier.

MS SOOKA: During your years in exile did you ever make any contact with
your father before he disappeared?

MR KHAULELA: I did not, no.

MS SOOKA: You have now been reintegrated into the armed forces?

MR KHAULELA: Exactly.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	M KHAULELA

MS SOOKA: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Any other questions? Dr Ally.

DR ALLY: Do you know if your father held any senior position in the
organisation or was he just a member?

MR KHAULELA: That one, I cannot answer because, like I said earlier on, I
was still young when he got arrested. When he came back I stayed only
with him two years and then I left him behind, but the thing is this,
from the people who worked with him, like those missing three figures in
Eastern Cape, Archers Kotolozi and the like, those were the closest
people who were working with him and I also know from the fact that
before they got missing they themselves, they were on the very same, what
do you call, investigating team because he was part and parcel of them in
those structures. Like now here I am having a document, but I may be, I
may term as the adjective of the whole mess that was taking place in
those years in the Eastern Cape.

DR ALLY: Sorry, this document.

MR KHAULELA: I have got it here.

DR ALLY: And what is this document?

MR KHAULELA: It is a document, I mean, people who were listed and some
are still surviving.

DR ALLY: And is it possible, have you give that document to anybody in
the Commission when you made your statement?

MR KHAULELA: I am willing to give and also I would like those people who
were there in that meeting to be also investigated. If they are not
involved in this thing, I do not see anybody, but the work that they were
sitting, planning is one and the same activities that they were busy, I
mean, killing people, some people were disappearing.

DR ALLY: Who is the author of that document?

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	M KHAULELA

MR KHAULELA: This is minutes of a meeting that took place on the 7th of
June 1985.

DR ALLY: Thanks, we would appreciate if you made that available.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Manthata.

MR MANTHATA: I am not too clear here where people give a guide like they
are saying Mr Curtis Nkondo did give something that could hint to the
disappearance of your father. Had Mr Nkondo at any stage met your father
before?

MR KHAULELA: If we have listened very well. I did mention that I did not
meet Mr Nkondo, but these are one of the stories that I get ...

MR MANTHATA: Oh, I see.

MR KHAULELA: ... throughout my investigation, but now the problem is I
cannot remember people whom I met, whom made mention of his name. As I am
saying that I would like him also, at least, to give an evidence, I mean,
on this matter. I said earlier on that he did not know my father, but he
described a person like my father. That is what I am saying.

MR MANTHATA: I see. In short, what I understand you to be saying to us is
you are giving us the lead to the people that we can contact in an effort
to trace the whereabouts of your father?

MR KHAULELA: Like I got, I once published in one of the newspapers, in
the City Press, the same thing. I was still in search of my father. I
have long started and trying to find out his whereabouts. Like I said I
managed to, I am just picking up with whatever story that has got to do
with his disappearance.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you. I have no further questions.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	M KHAULELA

CHAIRPERSON: Have you ever, sorry, Mrs Sooka wants to do a follow-up
question.

MS SOOKA: I just want to ask you. You sound like you have some sort of
theory of how your father or who was responsible for his disappearance.
Is that something that you have thought through?

MR KHAULELA: Well, maybe one would say I am one sided. I would not like
that. I am open. I am open in this matter, but nevertheless the stories
that I get, I might get them from one side.

MS SOOKA: My second question and, of course, you might choose not to
answer or disclose the information. You say that you have in your
possession minutes, extracts of minutes of a meeting. Who was the
meeting, what was the meeting about and who were the people present at
that meeting and how were you able to obtain the document?

MR KHAULELA: Do you want me to read the names of the people here?

MS SOOKA: No.

MR KHAULELA: And also because the question of the source. I may not
disclose it.

MS SOOKA: Disclose it. Okay. I do not think that we will ask you to read
the minutes, but I will simply ask you to tell us who the people were,
what kind of meeting this was and who the people were who were at this
meeting.

MR KHAULELA: This was a joint military and police meeting, high ranking
officers that took place at the Eastern Cape command.

MS SOOKA: You say the date when this meeting took place?

MR KHAULELA: It was the seventh of June.

MS SOOKA: Seventh June 1985? I hear my colleagues.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	M KHAULELA

MR KHAULELA: Yes, 7 June 1985.

MS SOOKA: I think that, obviously, we would need to get that document
from you.

MR KHAULELA: No problem. That is why I brought it here.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Khaulela, I do not think I have any follow-up questions.
We will get that document and we will certainly follow through whatever
leads there are. You will be knowing that we are getting lots of bits and
pieces of information from all over the country. We hope that as they are
coming together they will start fitting. Some of the information will
reply, will be giving answers to some of the questions on the other side
and vice versa. We have a database, an information flow control system
set up which will only show the benefit later after some way that we have
made through the hearings, but we will again, in good time, we will
report to you. We will appreciate it if you will leave the document with
us as you leave the stand. Thank you very much for coming to us.

MR KHAULELA: Would you mind if you gave me a copy of it?

CHAIRPERSON: A copy would be fine. A copy would be fine. We will do it
now. We have Mrs Janice Grobbelaar there who is our Manager of
Information Flow. She is a Professor from this area, but she is also
capable. So she will see to you getting a, I am saying she is a Professor
and capable. So, she will see to it that you get your copy of the
document. Thank you very much.

MR KHAULELA: Thank you.

	------------------------------





PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

