


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		05.09.1996		NAME: SOLOMON BOY KHOZA

CASE: 1325 - NELSPRUIT

DAY 4

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you, Mr Solomon. I would ask Commissioner Malan
to help you as you take your oath.

SOLOMON BOY KHOZA: (Duly sworn, states).

MR MALAN: Thank you, you may be seated.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you. We will ask the Commissioner here to help you
so that you put your testimony forward. Yasmin Sooka will help you.

MS SOOKA: Mr Khoza, don't be nervous. Do you want to tell us what
happened to you on the eve of Chris Hani's funeral. Speak loudly, please,
so that everybody can hear you.

MR KHOZA: We were sitting on the road. We had made a fire and policemen
came. They told us not to do any damage and afterwards a 4 X 4 came and
it was driven by a white man. When he came there he stopped, he took his
gun and he fired. I stood up. He shot me, he hit me. I fell down. I tried
to run. I ran to one house and one woman in that house tried to help me.
They took me to hospital. When I was in hospital I don't know what
happened. I was admitted and stayed in hospital for four months. I went
back to Barberton. After I was discharged from hospital I could not eat
certain foods like stiff porridge.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you for telling us that. But I am going to ask you a
few questions, just to make sure that we get your story right. Do you
want to tell me where you actually

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANG

	2	MR S B KHOZA

stay and what you did at that time for a living.

MR KHOZA: I am living in Barberton.

MS SOOKA: Are you employed?

MR KHOZA: No, I am not.

MS SOOKA: At the time that you were shot, were you employed?

MR KHOZA: Yes, I was working.

MS SOOKA: What were you actually doing?

MR KHOZA: At the Sowetan.

MS SOOKA: Were you a reporter?

MR KHOZA: No, I wasn't a reporter.

MS SOOKA: Where were you going on that particular day?

MR KHOZA: We were going to a night vigil, Chris Hani's night vigil.

MS SOOKA: Were you going there by bus?

MR KHOZA: Yes, by bus, we were waiting for the bus. This happened while
we were waiting for the bus at the station.

MS SOOKA: How many of you were there?

MR KHOZA: I couldn't tell, because we were many.

MS SOOKA: So while you were waiting at the station for the bus to come,
this is when this 4 X 4 came and you were then shot. Is that right?

MR KHOZA: Yes, that's right.

MS SOOKA: So in how many places were you shot on your body?

MR KHOZA: Two places.

MS SOOKA: Tell us where that was?

MR KHOZA: One on my left rib and on my right rib.

MS SOOKA: Since you have come out of hospital, when you came out of
hospital, did you make a statement to the police about what had happened?

MR KHOZA: No, I tried to go to the police station, but they NELSPRUIT
HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	3	MR S B KHOZA

couldn't do anything.

MS SOOKA: Why, didn't they want to open a charge?

MR KHOZA: It all ended up nowhere. They did, but it ended up nowhere.

MS SOOKA: Did they actually open a docket, did they take a statement from
you and did they press charges against this man who shot you?

MR KHOZA: Yes, they tried to press charges against this man. They have
taken a statement. The first time it was when I was in hospital. I
couldn't talk very well at that time. Again, I can't sit for a long time.
We went to court and then the case was remanded, remanded many times. Up
until it just ended like that.

MS SOOKA: Did they withdraw charges against this man?

MR KHOZA: Yes.

MS SOOKA: Did you have a lawyer?

MR KHOZA: No, I didn't.

MS SOOKA: So you did not press a civil claim against this man.

MR KHOZA: To claim you need money, I didn't have money to employ a lawyer.

MS SOOKA: What effect has the shooting had on your life now?

MR KHOZA: I am not crippled and I can't work. I can't do anything, I am
just no one. I tried to go for a pension. They told me I am still young,
I don't qualify for a pension. Now I am with my brother. He cannot afford
looking after me because he is also married and has a wife. Also, he is
taking care of my mother.

MS SOOKA: Were there other people who were shot in the same incident, by
the same man?

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	4	MR S B KHOZA

MR KHOZA: I was the only one shot.

MS SOOKA: When you say that you are crippled, can you tell us a little
bit more about that, please.

MR KHOZA: I can't live heavy things, anything that is heavy I can't lift
up. I was working somewhere and they couldn't take me any more because I
used to ask for days off to go for medical check-ups.

MS SOOKA: In your statement you also say that you don't remember so well.
Do you want to tell us a little bit about that?

MR KHOZA: Usually when I am doing things I forget. Even when someone asks
me to do something, I forget. I even forget what I was doing.

MS SOOKA: Have you received any treatment for that?

MR KHOZA: No, my brother gives me money to go for check-ups. Lots of time
I have pains I do go to doctors for treatment.

MS SOOKA: Where do you get the pains? Do you get the pains in your body
or do you get headaches?

MR KHOZA: Where I was shot.

MS SOOKA: And they give you tablets at the hospital?

MR KHOZA: Yes, they do.

MS SOOKA: You are not married?

MR KHOZA: No, I am not.

MS SOOKA: Do you have any children?

MR KHOZA: I have one.

MS SOOKA: How do you support yourself and the child?

MR KHOZA: My brother is supporting me. I can't support myself and he is
also taking care of my child.

MS SOOKA: What do you want the Truth Commission to do for you?

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	5	MR S B KHOZA

MR KHOZA: I can't tell, I think the Truth Commission will see what they
can do.

MS SOOKA: How old are you, incidentally?

MR KHOZA: I was born in 1966.

MS SOOKA: I asked you if you were a reporter and you said no, so what
work were you doing for the Sowetan?

MR KHOZA: We were delivering newspapers.

MS SOOKA: And you lost your job then obviously, at the time of the
shooting.

MR KHOZA: Yes.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Mr Khoza.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you very much, Mr Khoza. I will ask other
Commissioners to help you and if they have some questions to ask. Wynand
Malan?

MR MALAN: Mr Khoza, did you never go to the police to make a statement
and lay a charge against Mr Richards?

MR KHOZA: Witnesses went to the police station and laid a charge, not me.

MR MALAN: No, but you were the person shot. Did you never make a
statement? Did you never make a statement?

MR KHOZA: No, I didn't.

MR MALAN: Why didn't you go to the police and ask them to prosecute Mr
Richards and bring him to book? Because that is what you now ask of the
Truth Commission, but that should be asked of the police.

MR KHOZA: They arrested Mr Richards, because witnesses went to the police
station and made a statement against Mr Richards. The case was being
remanded from time to time.

MR MALAN: They never took a statement from you?

MR KHOZA: No.

MR MALAN: Mr Khoza, can you please also explain the

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	6	MR S B KHOZA

circumstances to me. You say that before Mr Richards stopped there, where
you were waiting for the bus, there was another vehicle from protective
services that stopped and told you not to be violent and then drove off.
Is that correct?

MR KHOZA: Yes, that car came first and they told us that we must not
damage anything. Then after that car, the police car left, then the 4 X 4
came.

MR MALAN: And was Mr Richards alone in his car?

MR KHOZA: Yes.

MR MALAN: In his 4 X 4. How many people were there waiting for the bus?

MR KHOZA: We were many. It is difficult for me to estimate how many
actually.

MR MALAN: And are you saying Mr Richards came with a 4 X 4. He stopped,
came to a halt, next to the group around the fire and then you say this
Mr Richards or Jombenleni, as you knew him, he got out of the car and
then he fell down? Is that what you said?

MR KHOZA: Yes, that's what I said.

MR MALAN: Why did he fall?

MR KHOZA: He was drunk. I thought he was drunk. So I just couldn't pay
much attention to him.

MR MALAN: Why do you think he stopped there?

MR KHOZA: I can't tell.

MR MALAN: Did nobody in the group get in his way and stop the 4 X 4, did
they not block his way perhaps? Did you see that?

MR KHOZA: No, no one. He stopped his car himself. We didn't even try to
stop his car.

MR MALAN: When he first got out and he fell down, did he

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	7	MR S B KHOZA

have his gun with him?

MR KHOZA: Yes, he had his gun with him.

MR MALAN: So he stopped, he fell down. Then he got up and then he took
his gun and then he fired the first shot? Is that so?

MR KHOZA: He stopped and then he came out of his car. He fell and then he
took his gun and he fired.

MR MALAN: And he fired all the shots at you? The only shots he fired, he
fired at you?

MR KHOZA: The first time he shot in the air. The second time I was
sitting down, so I stood up, I tried to run and that is when he started
shooting at me. I went to one house. I tried to get some help. One woman
tried to help me, until I was taken to hospital.

MR MALAN: I will tell you why I am asking these questions, because we
need to find a context. The Truth Commission deals with conflict within
the political framework. Now the only reference that is political in
this, seems to be the fact that a group of you were waiting for a bus to
go to the vigil for Chris Hani. Suddenly somebody pitches and he starts
shooting. But there is no indication that he has a political motive. What
is the political record of this Mr Richards? Can you tell us? Do you
think he had a political motive or do you think he had some revenge
ideas, looking for you or do you think he was simply drunk? How do we
assess this within the framework of the political conflict? I am sorry
that I am making your life so difficult.

MR KHOZA: Actually I can't tell really, except that he is a boer. He owns
a farm. If he belongs to any political organisation that one, I don't
know and I can't tell you.

I can't say that.

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	8	MR S B KHOZA

MR MALAN: We will certainly see what more we can find out, whether we can
bring it within the context. But from my side for the moment, thank you
very much. Back to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: While you are still there I would like to notify other
members here that a bus will leave here to the Promenade Hotel and
another bus will leave here to Gangamasani. We will also ask
Commissioners to help you so that you verify your testimony.

MS SOOKA: You have just said now that he was a farmer. But in your
statement you also say that he was well-known and that his nickname was
Yambeleni. Just tell us what that means and why he was given that name
and did you know him before this thing happened?

MR KHOZA: I don't know how to explain this. I don't know how to explain
this very well, except that he owned a farm and he used to kick doors
when he was going to his workers' houses. His real name is Richard. This
Yambeleni is just his nickname.

MS SOOKA: What does Yambeleni mean?

MR KHOZA: I don't know how to put this in English.

CHAIRPERSON: Order, order, please. We want you to explain to the
Commission why he was called Yambeleni. Because when you say you don't
know, it is difficult for us, for the Commission to understand what
Yambeleni really means.

MR KHOZA: I can't tell you why he was called Yambeleni. Because when I
grew up I found him being called Yambeleni. Why he was called Yambeleni I
don't know.

CHAIRPERSON: Order, order, please.

MS SOOKA: Did he know you before he shot at you?

MR KHOZA: No, I don't know.

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	9	MR S B KHOZA

MS SOOKA: But you knew him.

MR KHOZA: Yes, I used to know him, I used to know him. He was driving
around in the location.

MS SOOKA: So everybody in the location knew him.

MR KHOZA: Yes, they knew him.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Mr Khoza.

CHAIRPERSON: We want to thank you. If I may ask you a question. Just a
little question. By the time when you were on your way to the night vigil
of the late Chris Hani, I assume your trip was actually well-organised by
some organisers of the political organisations?

MR KHOZA: It could be maybe from the wing Umkhonto.

CHAIRPERSON: Why was your case not attended to?

MR KHOZA: I don't know.

CHAIRPERSON: You have also quoted someone here, a person from South
African Council of Churches who assisted you. May I ask a question. Why?
Why did the South African Council of Churches not make a follow-up if you
were undertaking the trip officially? Because if I remember correctly,
during that time all these particular organisations were unbanned, and if
perhaps someone had to shoot you, why didn't they make a follow-up, more
especially a person that was known?

MR KHOZA: I also do not know exactly.

CHAIRPERSON: We want to thank you. I will say that more details are
required from your story, but however, we do sympathise with you and in
your condition as you are now, up to a stage where you had to be affected
in your body. Now if we investigate your matter further, we will request
you, you need to make use of the hospital facilities or health
facilities, where you could get assistance. Now that there

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

	10	MR S B KHOZA

are many things that are being done. You need to check what can be done
in order to get assistance. You should not wait for the results of the
Commission.

MR KHOZA: I thank you.







	--------------















































NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMULANGA

