
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	07 APRIL 1997

NAME: 	NONDITHINI IRENE NOSAKELE KIVA

CASE:		EC0502/96	-	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 1

____________________________________________________________

REV XUNDU: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like you, Mam, to take an
oath. Nondithini Irene Nosakele Kiva, please stand up.

NONDITHINI IRENE NOSAKELE KIVA: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you. I will lead her with questions, Mr Chairperson. We
have your story here in front of us. I would like you to give us a
picture of what was happening in Adelaide during this time when Andile
was murdered.

MS KIVA: It was on a Saturday, it was on a Saturday. Andile went to visit
his friends in Dubane. They were chased away by the soldiers. They found
him, they assaulted him with rifle butts. The took him to the police
station. When they arrived there they assaulted him. In the morning they
took him to the hospital.

REV XUNDU: How old was Andile at the time? Was he at school or was he not
at school?

MS KIVA: He was about 19 years old. He was not at school, he was working.

REV XUNDU: Was he a member of any organisation in Adelaide?

MS KIVA: I think so, but I am not sure.

REV XUNDU: What was the reason for his assault?

MS KIVA: It was a time when the police found you in the streets, they
would assault you even if you did not do anything.

REV XUNDU: You are saying that the police were beating everybody in the
street?

MS KIVA: Yes, people were assaulted that year.

REV XUNDU: Nobody was protected?

MS KIVA: No.

REV XUNDU: The police you mentioned here, Mbulelo Tom, you said that
Mbulelo Tom said your dog is dead. Do you know him?

MS KIVA: Yes, I know him.

REV XUNDU: Did he born there?

MS KIVA: No, he was not born in Adelaide.

REV XUNDU: When he said that your dog is dead, what was the reason for
him to say this? Please keep quiet at the door.

MS KIVA: He was in a Hippo and he told me that Witbooi is dead. When I
tried to cry he said, why do you cry, your dog is dead.

REV XUNDU: Did they, was there any conflict between him and your son
before?

MS KIVA: No.

REV XUNDU: Was there a charge laid?

MS KIVA: No, there was no charge laid against him.

REV XUNDU: Was there any inquest?

MS KIVA: No.

REV XUNDU: Did you lay a charge against him?

MS KIVA: No, I did not.

REV XUNDU: Why did you not lay a charge against him?

MS KIVA: I think we were not aware.

REV XUNDU: As you are here today in this Commission, what would you like
the Commission to do for you?

MS KIVA: As Andile was a breadwinner, he was helping his mother to
support the children, but my mother died and she

left the children alone.

REV XUNDU: These children are Andile's sister. Nobody is supporting them
and nobody is paying for their education.

MS KIVA: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Would like us to help them?

MS KIVA: Yes.

REV XUNDU: In which standards are they?

MS KIVA: The other one has passed standard ten and the other one is doing
standard six.

REV XUNDU: Do you have anything else you want to add?

MS KIVA: No, there is nothing. They are homeless if the Commission can
help them to get a place to stay.

REV XUNDU: Thank you. Thank you Mr Chairperson, I hand over to you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Sandi.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson. You said that you did not lay a
charge against him?

MS KIVA: No, we did not.

ADV SANDI: Were you afraid or what was the reason?

MS KIVA: Yes, we were afraid, because at that time it was difficult to go
to the police to lay a charge.

ADV SANDI: Were the police protecting people in the community?

MS KIVA: No, the people were not protected.

ADV SANDI: In other words you mean that you were scared of the police?

MS KIVA: Yes, we were scared of the police in the community. You would
not go to the police station to ask the whereabouts of your family
member, they would beat you up.

ADV SANDI: Thank you, Mam. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Nosakele, what is your relationship between yourself and
Andile?

MS KIVA: He is my cousin.

CHAIRPERSON: Where is Andile's father?

MS KIVA: He passed away when they were still young.

CHAIRPERSON: In other words, Andile was your responsibility?

MS KIVA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: When you were giving your testimony, if I heard you
correctly, you said this incident happened by the, the police were in a
Hippo. Where was this Hippo?

MS KIVA: It was in Spikunye.

CHAIRPERSON: What happened to this Hippo?

MS KIVA: I do not know.

CHAIRPERSON: What happened to, what do you think happened to Andile?

MS KIVA: I am not sure, because they were chased away by the police and
they ran away, but they managed to find Andile.

CHAIRPERSON: Everybody who was with Andile was chased away?

MS KIVA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Were these members of an organisation?

MS KIVA: I do not know.

CHAIRPERSON: You said that this Hippo got an accident. Was it in Dubane
location?

MS KIVA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Are there any other questions? June Crichton.

MS CRICHTON: Ma Kiva, can you hear me? Can you hear me? There is just one
question I want to ask you. There was a witness to this attack by the
name of Zibangele. Who is he?

MS KIVA: Yes, there was a witness by the name of Zibangele.

MS CRICHTON: And so, he saw the whole incident.

MS KIVA: No, but, because he ran away, he did not see.

MS CRICHTON: But was it him that came to tell you about it?

MS KIVA: Yes, he came to me saying that they were chased away by the
Hippo.

MS CRICHTON: Alright, thank you very much. Thank you, Mr Chair.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Nosakele, we thank you for coming to this Commission. It
is very painful to see that your cousin was killed like a dog. As you
have already said that Tom said that the dog is dead. It is very painful
that after he was murdered there was no court case. You did not get any
compensation as a family. What Tom said that Andile is dead, it is very
painful. We thank you for coming here on behalf of your sister to tell
the story to the Commission in order to show that Andile was not a dog,
he was a human-being. We, as the Commission, we will investigate about
this matter. We will make sure that the death of Andile will not be like
the death of an animal. We will try to ask Tom questions if he is still
alive in order to know what was happening at that time. Maybe Tom will
know that the death of a person is very painful, it is not like the death
of a dog. We thank you very much. We will come back to you to get some
clarity on certain issues. Thank you.

















