
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	09-04-1997	

NAME:	NOWATASE R. KOBESE

CASE: 	GRAHAMSTOWN

		DAY 3

___________________________________

NOWATASE REGINA KOBESE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. I will lead you with questions so that you can
tell us your story and to clarify certain matters.

	Are you here to talk about your husband?

MS KOBESE:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Was he working for the Municipality?

MS KOBESE:	No, he wasn't working. He was not employed.

REVD XUNDU:	His name is Labourer Notiti Steven?

MS KOBESE:	He is Doyisele Steven.

REVD XUNDU:	Please tell us your story?

MS KOBESE:	Steven left me on Sunday, he told me that he was visiting Mr
Fani. He did not come back until Monday. There was a young man who came,
who was sent by the Fani family to inform us that he was run over by a
car and he was also axed.

REVD XUNDU:	Who is Fani?

MS KOBESE:	Mr Fani is staying with us in the township, but he is in
Parliament now.

REVD XUNDU:	You said that he was run over by a casper?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, a van.

REVD XUNDU:	Is it a police van?

MS KOBESE:	No, it was a van who was driven by Amagoloda, the people who
were known as Amagoloda.

REVD XUNDU:	Who are these people?

MS KOBESE:	They were the people who were following Nohashe.

REVD XUNDU:	Who was Nohashe?

MS KOBESE:	Nohashe was the Mayor at Fort Beaufort at the time.

REVD XUNDU:	You said that Nohashe had followers?

MS KOBESE:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	These people were assaulting you?

MS KOBESE:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Who was Kobese?

MS KOBESE:	Kobese was on Fani's side.

REVD XUNDU:	You mean that he was an activist?

MS KOBESE:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	After being run over by this van and they also assaulted him
with axes, did he go to a hospital?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, the police came and they took him to hospital. When we
arrived there, we were told to come in the next morning. They then told
us to go back home because he was feeling cold.

	We then visited him the next morning, he was better that day. He told us
that he was feeling better, but he did not notice these people who ran
him over, he said that there were many people, they left him there dead.

REVD XUNDU:	They left him for dead? He was discharged from hospital?

MS KOBESE:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	He came back home?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, he came back home.

REVD XUNDU:	Did he work?

MS KOBESE:	No, he did not work, he was not well, he was not feeling well
because he had a black spot in the stomach.

REVD XUNDU:	When did he die?

MS KOBESE:	He died in 1990.

REVD XUNDU:	He died after six years?

MS KOBESE:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	After that incident?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, after that incident.

REVD XUNDU:	Was there any case opened?

MS KOBESE:	No, there was no case opened, but the police just wanted to
know where he was coming from when he was assaulted.

REVD XUNDU:	Ms Kobese, by coming to the Commission, what are your
expectations?

MS KOBESE:	I would like the Commission to help me with my children,
because they are not at school.

REVD XUNDU:	How many are they?

MS KOBESE:	They are three. One of them is still doing standard 7 and the
other one is doing standard 9.

REVD XUNDU:	You would like the Commission to help you to support your
children?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, and also my younger child.

REVD XUNDU:	Is there anything else you want to add?

MS KOBESE:	No, there is nothing.

REVD XUNDU:	Mr Chairperson, let me hand over to you.

CHAIRMAN:	Ntisiki Sandi.

ADV SANDI:	The people who were referred to as Amagoloda, who gave them
this name? The people called them Amagoloda or what?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, people called them Amagoloda, they referred to him as
Amagoloda.

ADV SANDI:	What did they mean when they were saying they were Amagoloda?

MS KOBESE:	Because they were assaulting people, we were members of the
ANC, they were Amagoloda, they were known as Amagoloda in the location.

ADV SANDI:	Were there any other people who died because of the conflict
between Amagoloda and the people?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, and some of them were injured.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Ma'am.

CHAIRMAN:	Mrs Nowatase, you mentioned Matinka's name who was working for
the South African Police. What is the connection in this case?

MS KOBESE:	No, I don't know him.

CHAIRMAN:	Ms Kobese, as he recovered after this, did he notice any of
these people?

MS KOBESE:	He said that he did not notice any of these people because it
was at night.

CHAIRMAN:	Why did he think the perpetrators were Amagoloda?

MS KOBESE:	He saw a brown van coming towards him.

CHAIRMAN:	You mean that Amagoloda were using brown vans?

MS KOBESE:	Yes.

CHAIRMAN:	The police vans?

MS KOBESE:	No, the Toyota.

CHAIRMAN:	He saw a van?

MS KOBESE:	Yes, he noticed that they were driving this van.

CHAIRMAN:	Thank you Mr Kobese, we will investigate this matter. We have
been given this responsibility to investigate such matters.

	Our Investigative Unit will try and investigate, but I would like to
point out that it would be very difficult to investigate this but if we
can get assistance from the community, if people can come forward, who
are going to be

witnesses, for this case, or if there are people who applied for amnesty,
who would help us, it would be easy because your husband did not see
anyone, he did not even see the number plate of the van, but we will try
to investigate this matter. If we succeed we will tell you, but we will
try even if we can fail, thank you Mrs Kobese.

	--------------------

