				 	1		 	 Z MFONO


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.05.1997		

NAME: 	ZANIWE MFONO

CASE:	EC1440/96SBR	

HELD AT:	KING WILLIAM’S TOWN

DAY 3

________________________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Zanyiwe Mfono, Nobesuthu Patience Mbelekana. Are you going
to take their names ? Are you going to give evidence ?

N DYEVANA: I’m here with my mother. Neliswa Dyevana is my name.

CHAIRPERSON: Mpulwana Sithabathaba, are you going to give evidence ?

M SITHABATHABA: Yes

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

ZANIWE MFONO: (sworn states)

NENESA DYEVANA: (sworn states)

NOBE SUTHU PATIENCE MBELEKANA: (sworn states)

NOMBUKWANE SITHABATHABA: (sworn states).

CHAIRPERSON: Ms Maya.

MS MAYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Mrs Mfono. We’ll start with you. The
evidence that you are going to give the Commission to-day is about
Kenneth Masibonge, who was shot in 1987 when he was 17 years of age. Is
that so ? Was Kenneth you child ?

MRS MFONO: Yes.	

MS MAYA: Could you tell us the story please Ma’am.

MRS MFONO: I just heard bullet sounds, twice. I did not take them
seriously, it was a night. I slept. The next morning, the other kids said
I must go ask where Masibonge had been arrested. I asked where he was.
The said that the police had taken him. I went to the police station,
told them I was looking for Masibonge. The police said he was not there.
I went to the hospital. It was at Frere Hospital. I found out then that
he was there at the hospital. After that, the sister went to visit at
Frere and found him there. I was asked to go and sign some documents
because he was going to be transferred to Cape Town. He was shot at the
side. He was going to be taken to Cape Town. I went and signed the
documents. He came back from Cape Town in June the same year. He could
not do anything for himself. He was paralyzed. He cannot do anything for
himself. The police came and fetched him. He was asked to come to court,
to appear in court, both with the other kids ...

MS MAYA: Excuse me, Ma’am. Why was he shot ? Do you know ?

MRS MFONO: No, I do not know.

MS MAYA: Was he a member of a political organization ?

MRS MFONO: He was a school child.

MS MAYA: Were there problems at school at the time, do you remember ?

MRS MFONO: There were no problems. I think the other child would tell a
better story, he’s here.

MS MAYA: Therefore, you never got details as to why your child was shot,
but do you know who shot him ?

MRS MFONO: He was shot by a policeman.

MS MAYA: Do you know which policeman is this ?

MRS MFONO: Yes.

MS MAYA: It’s Lokhwe, Lunga Lokhwe.

MS MAYA: Did you give in a statement, or was Lokhwe charged ?

MRS MFONO: I went to an attorney. My witness is here. This attorney
represented this child and they were innocent.

MS MAYA: What is he using now, what was he using went he went to the, to
court.

MRS MFONO: He was using a wheelchair.

MS MAYA: So you don’t know what the case was all about ?

MRS MFONO: No, I don’t know.

MS MAYA: We will ask for the witness’s name. What is his name ?

MRS MFONO: Mlandeli.

MS MAYA: We will talk to him. Therefore, Ma’am, the fact that your son
was injured, there was no case about that.

MRS MFONO: No.

MS MAYA: Would you, do you have any requests ?

MRS MFONO: Yes.

MS MAYA: What are they ?

MRS MFONO: My child is still at school, I’m on pension, I suffer from
high blood pressure.

MS MAYA: Masibonge eventually passed away. What happened ?

MRS MFONO: He used his wheelchair for four years. After that, as he was
paralyzed, his bottom started rotting. His knees started protruding, the
bones and around his ribs.

He was sent to Frere Hospital and they amputated him and he passed away
in operation.

MS MAYA: Thank you, Ma’am. Your requests ?

MRS MFONO: I have a child at school.

MS MAYA: How old ? When was he born ?

MRS MFONO: In 1982.

MS MAYA: What standard is he doing ?

MRS MFONO: Standard 7.

MS MAYA: Was Masibonge your oldest, eldest child ?

MRS MFONO: No, there’s one older than him.

MS MAYA: He’s your only child at school, this one you’re talking about ?

MRS MFONO: Yes. No, I have no other requests.

MS MAYA: I will hand you over to the Chairperson when I’m through with
the other lady. Thank you.

MS MAYA: Ma’am, how do you pronounce your surname ?

MRS MBELEKANA: Mbelekana.

MS MAYA: Mbelekana.

MRS MBELEKANA: Yes.

MS MAYA: Mrs Mbelekana, you’re going to talk about Mbulelo Archie who was
your son, who was shot at Komga. Is that so ?

MRS MBELEKANA: Yes, he was stabbed on the 28th of November 1993, yes.

MS MAYA: In your statement you give detail that he was killed by people
who were members of two organizations. Could you give us the details ?

MRS MBELEKANA: First of all, I was at work in Tamarah. Apparently, on the
Thursday he’d been elected as the ANC Chairperson. On the Sunday he was
going to take his position, take up his position as the Chairperson.
Apparently, at about 3 a.m. on Sunday, somebody knocked on his window. He
got out. When he got out, there were two doors, he used the back door. By
the steps he came across these people who stabbed him. I was taken from
Keimouth and the corps was already taken. I was told that they stabbed
him to death and left him to die.

MS MAYA: Do you know who it is that warned him ?

MRS MBELEKANA: Unkoluleko Xhani.

MS MAYA: You don’t remember his surname ?

MRS MBELEKANA: Unkoluleko Unxholi.

MS MAYA: Is he still around ?

MRS MBELEKANA: Yes.

MS MAYA: In Komga ?

MRS MBELEKANA: Yes.

MS MAYA: Was Archie a member of political organization, or what was the
name of the organization ?

MRS MBELEKANA: ANC.

MS MAYA: Did you find out who it is that murdered him ?

MRS MBELEKANA: No, this is why I’m here, I want to know.

MS MAYA: Did you talk to the person who came to warn him.

MRS MBELEKANA: No. There were investigators. I don’t know what happened
eventually.

MS MAYA: Neliswa, would you like to add something ? Thank you, Mr
Chairperson.

MS DYEVANA: Mbulelo passed away on Sunday. It was about 9 a.m. When I got
up I went to get some water. I stay with my grandmother and aunt. A child
asked if I knew that Mbulelo had passed away. I said no, the last time I
had seen him was the previous night. When I got to the gate there were a
whole lot of people. I asked if it’s true that he’d died. Young children
answered me and told me that yes, he’d passed away and he was left by the
guava tree. I went to church, my father told me exactly what happened.
Apparently, he’d been with his girlfriend. What happened is, when the
person knocked,

the girlfriend hid herself under the bed. I asked how she’d hidden
herself under the bed because you cannot hide yourself under a double bed
base and I asked why it is that she should hide herself.

MS MAYA : Did she perhaps think that it’s another of his girlfriends ?

MS DVENAYA : I said, no, it’s impossible. Investigators came, pictures
were taken. Mrs Mbelekana came back from Keimouth to work back at home.
The investigators said that , they know who the perpetrators are. I
asked, why they are not arresting anyone. This investigator then said,
they investigated and said he went to the Prosecutor wanting a warrant of
arrest. We were hopeful. Nothing ever came of it, to this day.

MS MAYA: Is that all you have to say?

MS DYEVANA: Yes.

MS MAYA: Mr Sithabathaba, would you like to add something but apparently,
you are the uncle to the deceased ? When you heard that something had
happened, what did you find out ?

MR SITHABATHABA: Somebody came and knocked and said Mbulelo had passed
away. I went and indeed he’d was, he’d already passed on.

MS MAYA: You never found out who it is that murdered him ?

MR SITHABATHABA: No.

MS MAYA: In our statement, Mbulelo was murdered by ANC members as he was
going to be the new executive. These people together with other members
of yet another organization. Could you tell us more about this ?

MR SITHABATHABA: On the 11th of January, Mr Zola, an investigator came,
told me that he’d gotten the people. They were ANC members and PAC
members.

MS MAYA: Therefore, it is members of the two organizations ?

MR SITHABATHABA: Yes, ANC and PAC.

MS MAYA: Did you hear of any reasons ?

MR SITHABATHABA: No. This is what we’d also like to know.

MS MAYA: Was this a norm, that when such things would happen, these
organizations would come together and attack.

MR SITHABATHABA: I’d never heard of it before.

MS MAYA: Thank you. Do you have requests to the Commission ?

MRS MBELEKANA: First of all, I request that the case be investigated and
I want to know who killed Mbulelo, he’s, he was my only child. The father
died in 1982. Secondly, Mbulelo passed away. I’m alone, I need a house to
be built.

MS MAYA: Was Mbulelo your only child ?

MRS MBELEKANA: Yes, he was.

MS MAYA: You don’t have a child ..

MRS MBELEKANA: No. There’s a ten year old who’s my grand-niece from
Transkei.

MS MAYA: Thank you, I’ll hand you over to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: I thank you all for telling us about these incidents. We
know Komga velly, very well especially in connection with battles that
took place there. Even though it is difficult for you to be comforted.
However, a lot of work was done in Komga and around the border region. We
will look closely at your requests. If it was up to us, we would meet all
these needs, but we depend on the President to see what he can do, but in
the meantime, we thank you. Please step down.

					-----------------------------

