
	1	M KOTA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 18.04.96	NAME: MIKE KOTA

CASE: EAST LONDON

DAY 4

__________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: We invite to the witness stand Mr Mike Kota. Good afternoon
Mr Kota, you are Mr Kota?

MR KOTA: Yes.

MIKE KOTA: (sworn states)

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Mr Kota you have come to tell us about
the death of Jeanette Mahonga, is that right?

MR KOTA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Who was killed very tragically with a petrol bomb. Is she
related to you? Is she a member of your family?

MR KOTA: Yes we are members of the same organisation.

DR BORAINE: The same organisation.

MR KOTA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: So it's not a family member?

MR KOTA: No.

DR BORAINE: But you are a witness?

MR KOTA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much indeed. The hardworking Mr Ntsiki Sandi
will help you in the questions, and I want you to know that we are very,
very pleased that you are here and take your time as you tell your story.
Thank you.

MR SANDI: Mr Kota you stay at Seymour?

MR KOTA: Yes.

MR SANDI: How long have you been staying there?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	M KOTA

MR KOTA: I was born at Seymour and I grew up at Seymour.

MR SANDI: What kind of job are you doing?

MR KOTA: I am a town clerk there.

MR SANDI: At Seymour?

MR KOTA: Yes I am the town clerk at Seymour.

MR SANDI: In other words you are the mayor?

MR KOTA: Yes I am the mayor.

MR SANDI: Oh, as we are now talking we are talking to the mayor. Now are
you telling me I should watch my steps as I talk to you? Mr Mayor now
let's come back to this issue. Let us start exactly here. The family of
Mahonga were you related to that, or was there a kind of friendship?

MR KOTA: Yes. I had a relationship with a family because Sister Mahonga,
Jeanette Mahonga we were together in the organisation of the African
National Congress.

MR SANDI: This sister Jeanette Mahonga and her daughter, is it her
daughter that is with you here today?

MR KOTA: Yes, that's her daughter Nonkuthalo.

MR SANDI: Was she present on the day of the incident that you are going
to describe today?

MR KOTA: Yes she was there.

MR SANDI: Can I first understand about Sister Mahonga, what kind of a
person are we talking about here? I don't think I know her, can you
briefly tell us a picture of the person we are talking about here, Sister
Mahonga.

MR KOTA: Sister Mahonga was a leader at the Seymour under the African
National Congress, and she was really fighting against apartheid during
that time, and she was also helping the government of Brigadier Gqozo.
She was a member, she was actually a chairperson and at the same time she
was a member of the Women's League at Border, it was in the ANC

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	M KOTA

organisation. There are many committees actually that she served. Some of
those committees were really funded by the Netherlands. Well if I have to
describe her she was a heroine and she was a leader.

MR SANDI: Do I understand that she was the top at the school? Where was
she working?

MR KOTA: She was working at Seymour.

MR SANDI: Are you referring to Seymour Clinic? Not let us refer to the
day on the 21st of October 1992, you say on that day there was a meeting
organised, can you please give us briefly what kind of a meeting was
that? Can you tell us what happened the day before?

MR KOTA: On this day there was a meeting of an organisation, there was a
World Vision organisation. It was really funding local schoolchildren who
were from poor families. The officials of those was from Bayi(?) which is
in Port Elizabeth. There was a committee as well at Seymour that was
organised. Sister Mahonga was a member of that committee. Because of the
sickness that I had that day I couldn't go to the meeting. Well the
meeting went on. As I have already mentioned, Sister Mahonga was a nurse.
She gave me some few medicines so that I can go to bed. And late I was
supposed to go to her place so that she can report.	Well I went home, I
slept. The meeting went on without me. 	At about 7 o'clock I went to
Sister Mahonga's place and she gave me a report about the meeting. She
told me that there was a Mr Betane who was a member ...(intervention)

MR SANDI: Can I just disturb you, do you say that the meeting was at
Sister Mahonga?

MR KOTA: Yes the meeting was at Sister Mahonga.

MR SANDI: It started at 7?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	M KOTA

MR KOTA: Yes it started at 7 in the evening.

MR SANDI: And when did it stop?

MR KOTA: No it wasn't a very long meeting. At about 8, past 8 it ended.

MR SANDI: You can proceed.

MR KOTA: After meeting her she gave me a report. She said one member did
something that was not appreciated in the organisation. He wrote a letter
to Port Elizabeth that the committee has to be mandated. And she further
went on to give me a report that the committee will be extended so that
we have a good management. Well we went on to discuss this fact and then
we came to the conclusion that it was a wrong thing that was done. We
decided to write a letter.

MR SANDI: You know that member was a teacher Mr Betane, where were you at
the time?

MR KOTA: We were at the outside room, there was flat there, Nonkuthalo
was staying in that flat.

MR SANDI: Other people didn't go to Seymour? Can you tell us about
Seymour for other people who might have been hearing this word for the
first time, how big is Seymour and the development?

MR KOTA: Seymour is about 42 kilometres from Fort Beaufort to Queenstown,
it's one of the small towns, it's on the road just before Whittlesea.
Many people at Seymour - you know it doesn't have so many people, there
can be about 15,000 in that small town. The conditions of development
really dropped to a very low standard because people were now given sites
in Transkei in 1984, now the development for that area was really very,
very low.

	Together with Sister Mahonga we were trying by all means to carry the
developments for what, we wanted to

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	5	M KOTA

invite the overseas countries, the governments from overseas to fund us.
Now this World Vision was one of those organisations supporting funding
such small towns. Even in Britain we had support. We were working with
Vissieskop plan, this wasn't a very big organisation but it was just so
small. Now the developments really went on and we thought maybe with
those small developments as time went on would grow big.

MR SANDI: How do many people survive in this town of Seymour?

MR KOTA: Many people depend on agriculture. You know when they have
worked thoroughly in their fields they can produce a lot of food and
people can survive. As I have already mentioned that agriculture was
destroyed by the Ciskeian government because the Ministers were being
awarded sites, very big sites, that is when this thing of small funding
was destroyed.

MR SANDI: Mr Kota can we come back to Sister Mahonga. Sister Mahonga
shortly told you what happened at the meeting and you went to sleep. She
went to sleep in the big house?

MR KOTA: Yes. She explained to me everything what happened. I think it
was round about to 9, she went to sleep and she said I am now leaving
you. During that time the assaulting of leaders was on a very high rate
and I was staying there and I had to stay awake sometimes during the
night to take care of the house. That day or that night I stayed till
late because I had to take care.

MR SANDI: Now while sitting and waiting what happened?

MR KOTA: While I was sitting it wasn't long after she went into the house
I heard a knock at the door. It was knocking, "Michael, Michael open the
door. My house is

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	6	M KOTA

burning, my children, open it's me I am burning". I opened the door. When
I opened the door I saw Sister Mahonga. Her chest was burnt, her hair was
burning. She said to me a bomb was thrown at my chest. Well I went out, I
understood that these are people, people who did this are really from
around, they are not from far. Well I went out of the kitchen door
because there wasn't anybody, Mr Betane was not at home that day, I
rushed out of the kitchen door and I saw this house burning, it was
aflame, smoke coming out of the windows.

	I saw two people running away. They were taking the direction heading
the police station. The police station is about 200 metres from Sister
Mahonga's house. Those people were wearing balaclavas heading for the
police station. They went into the car that was close to the police
station. It was a Toyota 16 valve, the registration number was CB, and
they sped off.

MR SANDI: Do you say the car's registration was CB, didn't you realise
the numbers?

MR KOTA: No, I couldn't get the numbers.

MR SANDI: Was it at night?

MR KOTA: Yes it was because it was at night. The car sped off and I said
to Nonkuthalo can we try to take the children out of the house. I think
there was a child of about eight years. She was sleeping while the house
was burning. This child really cried and we went in to fetch her. People
came out. The response that night was very promising. They were flocking
to the house to come and help us.

	Well when the people passed near the police station shots went off. They
were shots from automatic rifles. These people trying to help were shot.

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	7	M KOTA

MR SANDI: Were you saying the police were shooting people who were
heading to help put the fire out?

MR KOTA: Yes, those people were being shot at. Well they went back
because they were fearing for their lives. They kept on shooting and
shooting and shooting. Well this continued. When we tried to put the fire
out, just before the fire could be ...(intervention)

MR SANDI: Are you telling me that they took another alternative way, was
the road next to the police station the shorter way to the house?

MR KOTA: Yes, they took the longer alternative route, because this other
one was very short. They couldn't pass because they were being shot at.

MR SANDI: Now did they arrive and could you manage to put the fire out?

MR KOTA: Yes, they managed. The police were already standing outside at
the verandah. They were saying "that is good for you". Well we didn't
realise at that time that those were very heavy and unacceptable words.
When we tried to extinguish the fire this time the shots were now
directed at us. We ran for our lives. The Reverend was also there, and
then we tried to hit, police were still shooting at us. MR SANDI: The
house was still burning at that time?

MR KOTA: Yes the house was still burning at that time. The police were
just standing there, they didn't come to help us, they are killing
people, they are shooting people, the people that were supposed to help
put out the fire.

MR SANDI: This thing that is (...indistinct) "serves you right", how did
you take that?

MR KOTA: Well it gave me the impression that the police were involved in
this, because according to what I heard

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	8	M KOTA

they were supposed to lend a helping hand, not to say "serves you right".

	Now during those times the conditions about politics, you know there
were harassments, many harassments directed at Sister Mahonga, she was
detained by those police. I wasn't really expecting them to come and
help, but that was a condition that was needing urgent attention.

	Well we managed to extinguish the fire. Sister Mahonga was taken to the
clinic. The sisters on duty called an ambulance urgently and it took her
to the hospital. The sister on duty that day received a telephone call
threatening her why did she call an ambulance. Sister Mahonga went to the
hospital that is when she was transferred to East London, and she passed
away here in East London.

MR SANDI: Did she die on that same day or the next day?

MR KOTA: I think she died five days after that. It was after comrades
went to visit her and members of the organisation.

MR SANDI: According to the doctor's report was she severely burnt?

MR KOTA: According to the doctor's report that bomb really had an effect
on her, she was burnt.

MR SANDI: Can you explain a bit to us about the post mortem, what does
the report say?

MR KOTA: Even if I didn't get a chance to read the post mortem or to have
a look at it, we heard that she was killed by the wounds from burning.

MR SANDI: After her funeral what happened at home?

MR KOTA: After she was buried the police were just around, even before
they were going up and down. You know during

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	9	M KOTA

prayer sessions the security police were coming to meet the people from
the prayers, they were making jokes saying, "now have a look at your
struggle".

MR SANDI: Were there problems on the day of the funeral, I mean from the
police side?

MR KOTA: As there was an organisation ANC Women's League Comrade Stofile
was supposed to address the masses. The police and the soldiers were in
large numbers there. They were very armed and they were surrounding us.
Even on our proceeding to the cemetery the police were there and the
soldiers as well, heavily armed.

MR SANDI: Mr Kota can we go back to the car that was CB, was there
anybody in the car?

MR KOTA: That car I saw in the day. As I have said before Seymour was not
such a big town, it was easy for me to see that car during the day,
because there were few cars during that time at Seymour. This car I saw
during the day it was driven by Mhlungisi Willi, Constable Mhlungisi
Willi, and he was together with people that I couldn't recognise because
they were wearing balaclavas.

MR SANDI: Constable Mhlungisi Willi that you saw on that day was he the
one driving that car, did you see him driving and others wearing
balaclavas?

MR KOTA: Yes, I saw him driving and others wearing balaclavas, no he
wasn't wearing a balaclava.

MR SANDI: There is a person who confessed seeing the car, can you tell us
and explain exactly what this person said?

MR KOTA: Yes this is Nonzi Mayike, she saw the car twice, it was very
close to Sister Mahonga's house and it was being driven by this that I
have now explained. When Nonzima explained she said Willi said to her
there were two

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	10	M KOTA

handgrenades in the car and a big rifle.

MR SANDI: Is Nonzi Mayike here today?

MR KOTA: Yes she is around here today.

MR SANDI: Would you make a request that she comes up to also ...(tape
ends) ...someone saw this car.

MR KOTA: She saw the car at the Post Office site. It was driven by the
same person that I have already mentioned. He's also here.

MR SANDI: Was there a case taken to the court of law with regard to this
whole matter?

MR KOTA: Yes we went to open a criminal case at the police station. The
police said to us there is not enough evidence about the death of Sister
Mahonga. Well we went to see our advocates. We were using Linden
Dorrington at that time. They tried their level best to meet with the
Attorney General so that an inquest might be opened. Now the Attorney
General permitted the inquest to take place, now that inquest it put
everything clear about the investigations, that Constable Willi and
others are the killers of Sister Mahonga.

MR SANDI: What did the court say, did it say with the evidence put
forward one has to be prosecuted so that there can be a case, because the
inquest would only concentrate on the fact that is there a person that
can be prosecuted about this whole matter?

MR KOTA: Yes the inquest found it very clever to prosecute Mr Willi and
the others.

MR SANDI: Now when did the case end?

MR KOTA: No prosecutions took place thereafter, besides the fact that we
only heard after that the case would be taken to the Supreme Court, it
was discovered at the Supreme EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	11	M KOTA

Court that there was not enough evidence and the case was withdrawn.

MR SANDI: Did the case all in all just end nowhere?

MR KOTA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Mr Kota, Mr Mayor do you have anything you want to say with
regard to this whole incident?

MR KOTA: There isn't anything that I want to say, but I want to put
forward before this Commission, we, the people of Seymour, even if this
thing happened that time we were really expecting Gqozo's government to
open the case and carry on, we would like the Commission to investigate
this matter about Sister Mahonga. Can you please search deeply because
one thing the police who we suspect killed Sister Mahonga they are still
police and they are still police at Seymour, and in that case there will
never, ever be peace at Seymour. We now ask the Commission, these
policemen they have to be removed because they were involved in Sister
Mahonga's case.

	One other thing we are aware it's a long time now since this thing
happened. Sister Mahonga's children are struggling. Well because of the
contributions from the community they have been looked after but they
cannot carry on anymore because Sister Mahonga was the breadwinner. The
community realised we can employ them in the developmental organisation
so that they can earn some living. She is now working at the offices of
those organisations. That is what we have to say before this Commission
today.

MS CRICHTON: Mr Kota I just want to ask you one question, when that
ambulance was called, the sister that called the ambulance received a
threat on her life, now is that sister still in Seymour?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	12	M KOTA

MR KOTA: Because of the threats and everything which was done she left
Seymour because she was afraid of her life. She realised that her life
was at stake because she used to receive many death threats. She is still
working but she is no longer in Seymour.

MS CRICHTON: The sister's name?

MR KOTA: I cannot remember well but I think if we can find out we can
know who that sister is.

MS CRICHTON: Can you give the name at a later stage?

MR KOTA: Yes.

MEMBER OF PANEL: I'd like to ask this question, how many children does
Sister Mahonga have?

MR KOTA: Sister Mahonga has four children. The eldest is in Cape Town, he
is working and he is married. He got married before Sister Mahonga died.
The second one felt that after passing her matriculation she should get
employment because she could not go further with her education. She is
presently at Bisho. She was very keen to continue with her education.
Nonkuthalo Mahonga also is working. She also discontinued schooling
because there was a problem with finances. She was here in East London.
She was doing administration, but because of inadequate funds she
couldn't continue further. Nozuku Mahonga is at home, she is unemployed,
she is not attending school. This also is due to lack of means. Their
father is also deceased.

MR BURTON: Thank you Chairperson. Mr Kota in your statement you mentioned
that there was a witness who had sen the car that you later identified
and that was being driven at the time that the witness saw it by
Constable Willi, that witness also identified another person who was in
that car as a Mr Betane, is that the same Mr Betane who was also a

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	13	M KOTA

committee member of World Vision and about whom there was a dispute? Not
the same person?

MR KOTA: It is the same person. That is the same person Mr Betane. He was
seen in this car with the police.

REVEREND TUTU: Any other questions. Thank you very much Mr Mayor. We are
really very happy to see young people who were involved in the struggle
still carrying on as leaders of the people. We are really happy again to
hear the way you tried to develop the community of your area.

DR BORAINE: Just before you leave could I just mention that we know that
there are additional witnesses and when the Commission takes up the
investigation they will be in touch with them so that they can get their
testimony as well. We will follow that up. Thank you.

REVEREND TUTU: Thank you. We are going to take a break.

COMMISSION ADJOURNS































EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

