
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	08 APRIL 1997		

NAME:	TEMTEM KUHLANE

		EVELYN MUHANE

CASE:		EC01231/96ALB		-	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 2

____________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Which one of you is Mrs Temtem Kuhlane

MRS KUHLANE: I am.

CHAIRPERSON: And who is the lady accompanying you.

MRS KUHLANE: Evelyn Muhane.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you also going to testify or have you just come to
accompany her?

MRS MUHANE: I have accompanied her, but there will be certain details
which I will be adding.

REV XUNDU: Thank you very much. We would like you both to stand so that
we can get you to take the prescribed. We would like to ask you, Temtem
Kuhlane, to stand.

TEMTEM KUHLANE: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you very much. Evelyn Muhane, could you please stand.

EVELYN MUHANE: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you very much. They have both been sworn in, Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you and we would like to ask Ms Tiny Maya to lead
your testimony by way of questions.

MS MAYA: Thank you Chairperson. Firstly, I would like to greet you Mrs
Kuhlane. You are going to tell us about Mntunyane. Is his name Mntunyane
or Mntuntyane?

MRS KUHLANE: His name is Mntunyane.

MS MAYA: What was Mntunyane to you?

MRS KUHLANE: This child had come from Port Elizabeth and was staying by
me. That was, one afternoon when a boy by the name of Michael came there
looking for Mntunyane and I said that he was not there. He wanted to know
where he was and I said he had gone to herd the cattle. He left and
Mntunyane came back. Late that night this boy knocked on the door and I
heard when they closed the door. I slept. His father was still alive
then. At sunrise I went to his room, found that he was not there and I
sat and waited for him to return. We all sat outside and waited. Then a
police car came driven by Putumeni and stopped in front of us, in front
of our house and I was called. Putumeni said something and left. I was
called back inside the house and told that Putumeni had come to tell us
that Mtunyane had been shot dead. He was my first born son.

	During the week a pile of clothes was brought to me. It was red with
blood. I took the clothes and put them outside and that is all.

MS MAYA: Can I just take you back a bit. How old was Mntunyane?

MRS KUHLANE: He was a young man. Although he was unmarried and he did not
have any children. He was not married yet, but he did have children.

MS MAYA: Was he in any way politically active at the time when he was
shot?

MRS KUHLANE: Yes, he was.

MS MAYA: In which way?

MRS KUHLANE: He was involved in the youth organisation.

MS MAYA: Do you remember the name of the organisation with which he was
involved?

MRS KUHLANE: While he was at school he was part of COSAS and when he
started working, I am not sure whether I should say he was in the youth
or what, but he was involved in politics.

MS MAYA: Did he ever encounter any problems with the leaders in the
community?

MRS KUHLANE: No, but I do not know whether to refer to him as a policeman
or as a councillor, whether he was a policeman or a councillor, but his
name was Ntsikelelo. He was here in Grahamstown and he would come there
and it was evident that this child who had come to the house had heard
that he was going to come and that he had come so that they should go and
attack him, because the following day this woman came to tell us what
happened.

MS MAYA: Who had come to go and attack who?

MRS KUHLANE: This boy that this lady said his name was Michael came later
that, had been there earlier the day and came there that evening.

MS MAYA: Do you know Michael's surname? Does he live in the area?

MRS KUHLANE: Yes.

MS MAYA: Would you be able to remember later what his surname and details
are? Is he still there?

MRS KUHLANE: Yes, he is still there.

MS MAYA: If possible, we would like you to provide us with his details
later. What did you hear, what else did you hear when you were told the
child had been injured?

MRS KUHLANE: We were told that he had been shot and that the police had
gone to fetch him. This is what we were told the following day. We were
told that an ambulance had been called and the police had also come and
that the ambulance was escorted by police vans. We thought that he was
taken to the hospital and we phoned the hospital and we were told that
there was no such person. In the meantime he had been taken to the police
mortuary and, from what we heard, he was taken like a dog and just thrown
there.

MS MAYA: Did you ever hear who shot him?

MRS KUHLANE: This woman who says that he was shot in our house told us.

MS MAYA: Who did she say shot him?

MRS KUHLANE: She said Ntsikelelo shot him.

MS MAYA: Do you know what Ntsikelelo's surname is?

MRS KUHLANE: Yes, his surname is Botha.

MS MAYA: What did she say what happened? Why was he shot?

MRS KUHLANE: He was shot because they objected to the presence of
councillors and police at that stage and it was known that he was going
to come to the location and that is why the youth got together and went
there.

MS MAYA: As far as you know was anyone else injured in this shooting
incident?

MRS KUHLANE: He was the only one who was struck, the others all survived.

MS MAYA: Is there anything else you would like to add?

MRS MUHANE: Do you mean a complaint or something?

MS MAYA: Possibly a request which you have or a wish you would like to
express.

MRS MUHANE: I have spoken to my sister and she has expressed a wish that
she be assisted with these children, because she received his corpse and
she buried him in spite of their not having been any official post mortem
report or an inquest saying how he died or whatever and there was no
official inquest and there was no one prosecuted.

MS MAYA: Did you ever go to attornies?

MRS MUHANE: I was called, I was never called. It would have been better
if I was called to see that he was dead, but I was never called to
identify him. Not even in his coffin.

MS MAYA: Was there any reason why?

MRS MUHANE: I would say that it was because of the grief, because at the
time his father was still alive, but he was also very mixed up at the
time and preferred that we rather not see him.

MS MAYA: How old are his children now?

MRS MUHANE: They have already been circumcised. Two have been circumcised
and the one has not, they are still studying.

MS MAYA: So, there are still expenses involved in educating them. Are
they living with his mother?

MRS MUHANE: Two of them are living with her and the other one does not.

MS MAYA: Thank you very much. Is that all you would like to say?

MRS MUHANE: Yes.

MS MAYA: Mrs Kuhlane, is there anything you would like to add?

MRS KUHLANE: No, that is all.

MS MAYA: Thank you very much. I would like to hand you back to the
Chairperson. Perhaps there are other questions which they would like to
put to you.

CHAIRPERSON: Ntsiki Sandi.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Chairperson. Mamas I would like to ask you, apart
from Kuhlane, is there any, did Mntunyane use any other names.

MRS KUHLANE: in the location he was known as Beggar, but in his
identification document he uses the name Mntunyane.

ADV SANDI: At the time when Mr Botha appeared in court in connection with
these charges did you ever attend?

MRS KUHLANE: No, we were never informed and we never attended.

ADV SANDI: This Mafu in whose house this took place, who is she?

MRS KUHLANE: I think she is Botha's mother-in-law.

ADV SANDI: Is her house close to where your house is?

MRS KUHLANE: Yes, it is not too far. We get along well. They live in the
area.

CHAIRPERSON: The testimony which you have given that this person who
killed him was or the person who saw him being killed, who did you say it
was?

MRS KUHLANE: I would say that it was the woman who came to our house to
tell us?

CHAIRPERSON: Who is she?

MRS KUHLANE: That is the mother of the Mafu home. I do not know what her
names are, because when we call her we call here Mama Nenye.

CHAIRPERSON: Is she still alive?

MRS KUHLANE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Are there any other questions. We would like to thank both
of you. You have related a very tragic story before this Commission. We
would like, if it is at all possible, to obtain the name of this woman
whom you have referred to so that this Commission can contact her in its
quest for the truth. We have a statement before us from Ntsikelelo Botha
which we are now going to attend to and give him the opportunity to reply
to the allegations which you have made in your testimony. We would like
to ask you to take up your seats again.

	------------------------------

