TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 3 - 9 OCTOBER 1996



CASE NO:			CT/

VICTIM:			NOMBULELO KULA

VIOLATION:		SEVERE ASSAULT BY

POLICE

TESTIMONY BY:	NOMBULELO KULA



MS BURTON

[Indistinct] break and I would ask the audience please to remain I your
seats or in your places while the witnesses leave the room. Coliwe
Japhta. Did she not arrive today? Just before we go on, I would like to
request people not to eat in the hall. We want to keep the hall clean and
tidy and leave it as we left it, so if you need to eat, please take your
food and your packet outside of the hall. Thank you very much. We move
then to our next case and we are going to ask a number of people to come
to the stage together, because they or members of their family were all
caught up in the same events of the July 1985. We know that some of you
have family members who have come to support you, but we ask that those
family members must for the moment remain sitting where you are and we
ask to come to the stage Elizabeth Juda, Petrus Maciki and Julena
Sionzana, Mimi Sedanga and Nombulelo Kula.

Good morning again. Can everybody hear all right with your earphones? I
am going to ask you one by one to take the oath.



NOMBULELO KULA			Duly sworn states



MS BURTON

Is the other witness we were expecting Mimi Sedanga not present. Thank
you. Ms Kula are you going to speak first. Thank you.

NOMBULELO KULA

Yes.

MS BURTON

Will you tell us then what happened to you yourself that day the 3 July.

NOMBULELO KULA

On the 3 July 1985 it was on Wednesday at about 7 o’clock at night. We
were singing around the street from the old church to Epongweni township.

We met Zolile Silonyana who told us that there were police in Mr
Malithi’s and Mr Mfemgwana’s house and the police were waiting, armed
with they were armed with rifles. We were not scared, because we were not
planning to do anything. We were just singing. While we were still
singing,

I came near the Malithi’s house. I stood there and I saw a Casspir coming
and I didn’t know what happened after that. I just woke us, I regained
consciousness of Friday in Pilenomi hospital. I was called to the office.
They told me that I received a phone call from my home. They wanted to
know whether I could speak and then I said I can’t speak but I just need
a pen to write down how I felt at that time. I wanted to speak, but I
couldn’t, because my tongue, I couldn’t say a thing at that time.

I was asked by the police at this time whether I could talk or not. They
wanted to take a statement from me. These police were Johnson and Parks.
They came in the afternoon. I was shot and I lost my shoes that time.
They came with a van. They took me to the police station. They wanted me
to write a statement. I don’t even remember now how I wrote that
statement.

They used to come about three o’clock in the morning to ask me to write a
statement. I was still semi-conscious at that time. I was still receiving
treatment from the Pilenomi. I stayed there until Monday and they took me
to the court. And I was granted R300.00 bail and the conditions were that
I have to go to the police station every day at four o’clock.

The comrades told me to pay that money, but I couldn’t go there, because
it was my first time I saw a Casspir and I was so scared to go back
there, because I thought that I would be shot again.

On the 24 August when I went to the court, they detained me for six
months and sister Sionzana bailed me with a R100.00 bail and there were
no conditions at that time. That continued up until the day of the court
case. They charged, sentenced me to seven years in prison. I stayed there
for six months. And my attorney said that I have been unfairly sentenced
because the years were so many for me. Mr Mfengwana accused me of
breaking his TV’s aerial and his windows and his furniture. Their
furniture was at the police station at that time.

I was accused by Mr Mfengwana of breaking his house. That is all.

MS BURTON

[Indistinct] of an organisation at the time? [Indistinct] we seem to have
lost the sound I think.

NOMBULELO KULA

Yes, I was a member of an organisation.

MS BURTON

[Indistinct] went out to support the protests that were going on at the
time. And you say that you could not have damaged Mr Mfengwana’s
property, because it was not in the house at the time.

NOMBULELO KULA

I didn’t do this. He was just accusing me. He said that I was only woman
who was there. There were only men and I was the only woman with a white
belt in my waist. And what I want to know is that why did they shoot
Sifugasinzungana if I was the only woman in the crowd. And he accused me
that I was ahead of the crowd at that time.

MS BURTON

And what you were convicted of was public violence, because of the
alleged damaged property, is that right?

NOMBULELO KULA

Yes, I was accused of public violence, because the Judge said that it,
they just said that the Supreme Court in Pretoria found me guilty. And I
didn’t do that. I have never been in prison before but it is just that I
was a witness before, but not in prison.

MS BURTON

And the fact that you were in prison for that long time. You had one
child at the time and so there was nobody there to care for your child.
Is that right?

NOMBULELO KULA
No, there was nobody to care for my child.

MS BURTON

What happened to your child.

NOMBULELO KULA

My child couldn’t even go to school. He was in standard three at that
time. My child was taken from Middleburg by Ms Mansbogo - but she brought
him back and she my child couldn’t even go to school. And my child went
to Cape Town up until now. And when I came out of prison I didn’t even
have a home.

MS BURTON

And do you know where your child is now?

NOMBULELO KULA

My child is in Cape Town.

MS BURTON

You are unemployed here with nobody to help you.

NOMBULELO KULA

Yes, I am unemployed and I just get casual jobs now and then in the
township.

MS BURTON

[Indistinct] injured and you were then treated in hospital before you
were arrested. Have you had further results from that wound or are you
completely better.

NOMBULELO KULA

I am not better, because some people told me that I am sometimes mentally
disturbed. Because I was also injured in prison.

MS BURTON

How were you injured I prison.

NOMBULELO KULA

My hand was injured then. My left hand.

MS BURTON

Are you receiving any medical treatment now.

NOMBULELO KULA

No, I am not receiving any medical treatment.

MS BURTON

Ms Kula I think I will go on to the other witnesses and then perhaps my
colleagues might want to ask you more questions afterwards.

