				 	1			 M J BANI	


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.05.1997		

NAME: 	JACKSON MALIBISHE BANI

CASE:	EC0358/96KWT	

HELD AT:	KING WILLIAM’S TOWN

DAY 3

________________________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: I would like to greet you Sir, this afternoon. Mr Jackson
Malibishe Bani. Please stand up. Can you hear properly ?.

JACKSON MALIBISHE BANI: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Sir. You may sit down. Mr Tsiki Sandi. Thank you,
Mr Chairman.

MR SANDI: Mr Bani, you are here to tell us about what happened at your
home, but it was not only your home, it was together with other families.
You were, forcefully removed from Bluerock Farm to Potsdam. Is that
correct Sir ?

MR BANI: Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI: Who was forcefully removing here, you from Bluerock Farm ?

MR BANI: I, we were told that Sebe wanted us to be removed from Bluerock
Farm.

MR SANDI: For how long did you stay in Bluerock Farm ?

MR BANI: I’m not sure, but it was not for a long time.

MR SANDI: You say that the Ciskeian police came.

MR BANI: Yes. At that time, I had a place in Kadi, I arrived in the
morning from work.

When I arrived, people were forcefully removed.

MR SANDI: You said that there was damage done by the police, due to this.

MR BANI: I did not see this.

MR SANDI: You furniture, did, were, was it damaged ?

MR BANI: What I heard is that Reggie’s chicken were removed, were also
taken.

MR SANDI: Who is Reggie ?

MR BANI: Reggie is a white farmer.

MR SANDI: You were then taken to Potsdam. Were there any other people who
were helping the police in this act ?

MR BANI: Yes, there were people who helped the police.

MR SANDI: Were they helping the police, in which way, what were they
doing ?

MR BANI: They were taking people with their lorries, removing them from
this place.

MR SANDI: Are these people known as the Vigilantes ?

MR BANI: No. They are the people from the Municipality.

MR SANDI: Were you staying in shacks or in houses ?

MR BANI: Some were staying in shacks and some in houses.

MR SANDI: You were then taken to Potsdam ?

MR BANI: Yes, we are removed to Potsdam.

MR SANDI: Were you promised, did anyone promise to build houses for you
in Potsdam ?

MR BANI: We were not told anything, we were just forcefully removed.

MR SANDI: In your statement, Mr Bani, you said that the Government of
Ciskei promised you to build houses in Potsdam. Is that correct ?

MR BANI: No, that is not correct. No houses were built.

MR SANDI: Was there a promise ?

MR BANI: I don’t know, maybe I didn’t hear about it.

MR SANDI: Mr Bani, do have a request to the Commission to-day ?

MR BANI: Yes, I do, because our furniture was damaged, it was very
difficult for us especially in Potsdam.

MR SANDI: In your statement you mentioned that you’d like the Truth
Commission to do whatever it feels necessary.

MR BANI: I’m here to make my request.

MR SANDI: Please tell us your request, Sir.

MR BANI: Yes, I’m going to tell your request.

MR SANDI: Please tell us, Sir.

MR BANI: I don’t know what the Commission can do for me, but I would like
to do a request to the Government.

MR SANDI: Thank you, Sir. Is that all you wanted to say ? Is that all you
wanted to say concerning this matter Sir ?

MR BANI: But there are also details I didn’t ask about, but we do have
them in our statements.

MR SANDI: When I was asking you questions, I did not ask you everything,
because I noted that we have information in our statements.

MR BANI: Yes, you do have an information, but I don’t know why you did
not ask me.

MR SANDI: Thank you, Sir. Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you, Sir. It is clear that you are an old man now,
but we do

have details of your story in front of us. We’ve also noted your request
that you would like the Government to do, to help you because you lost
your furniture and your house. We’ll forward you request to those in
authority. Thank you, Sir, you may now go back to your seat.

MR BANI: Thank you.



						--------------------------

