					1				N J BANIE




TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.05.1997		

HELD AT:	KING WILLIAM’S TOWN

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________________HEARING
COMMENCES WITH A HYMN AND A PRAYER

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Reverend for starting our day for us by a prayer.
We welcome people who are going to appear before the Commission to-day on
our last day in Kingwilliam’s Town. We will ask Ms Maya to give us the
order of the day. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

MS MAYA: Honourable Commissioner this morning of Wednesday, 14th of May
1997 our last day here in King William’s Town. I have a list of people
who are going to appear before the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
We have people from four regions. King William’s Town, Zwelitsha,
Ginsberg and Komga but there are people from Monday which are going to be
included in the list. In to-day’s list we have 22 people but because of
those who are supposed to appear on Monday we are going to have 25
people. I will read out the witness, the victim, nature of violation,
area and the year of the incident.

We have : Malibishe Jackson Bani, talking about himself, severe
ill-treatment, 1985.

Siyalana Mathinzini, talking about himself, severe ill-treatment in King
William’s Town, 1992.

Luvuyo Siyo, talking about Nombulelo Siyo who was murdered in King
William’s Town in 1992.

Zanyiwe Evelyn Matyolo, talking about Zalisile Ernest Matyolo who was
murdered in Zwelitsha, 1985.

Mandla Christopher Bobe, talking about himself, attempted murder in
Zwelitsha, 1985.

Jeremiah Ndudula, talking about himself, harassment in Zwelitsha, 1984.

Zodwa Patsa, talking about Vuyani Patsa who was murdered in Zwelitsha in
1985.

Masizole Skiet, who will be talking about himself, attempted murder in
Zwelitsha in 1993.

Bukwana Bildokwe, who will be talking about himself, severe ill-treatment
in Zwelitsha in 1992.

Ntsikelelo Wellington Solani, who will be talking about himself, severe
ill-treatment in Zwelitsha, 1991.

Nomava Lillian Mzinzi, talking about Nancy Vera Mzinzi who was murdered
in Zwelitsha, 1991.

Mpumeleli Elias Dara, talking about himself, severe ill-treatment in
Zwelitsha, 1991.

Bulukazieles George, who will be talking about Thembalakhe George who was
murdered in Ginsberg, 1985.

Georgina Nomvuyo Marai, talking about Lipota Marai who was murdered in
Lesotho, 1982.

Thabi Ngange, who will be talking about Funeka Nobantu Ngange and Nomriti
Nombande Ngange, who were murdered in Komga in 1990.

Ronald Ngqandu, who will be talking about himself, attempted murder in
Komga, 1990.

Matse Wellington Mbenento, who will be talking about himself, attempted
murder in Komga, 1991.

Zanyiwe Mfono, who will be talking about Kenneth Masibonge Mfono who was
murdered in Komga, 1989.

Nobesuthu Patience Mbelekana who will be talking about Mbulelo Archie
Mbelekana who was murdered in Komga in 1993.

Mark Richard Sparg who will be talking about himself, severe
ill-treatment and arson in Komga, 1993.

Thembeka Gladys Bata talking about Lizo Desmond Bata who was murdered in
King William’s Town, 1992.

That is all Mr Chairperson.

I will now read those who are supposed to appear on Monday.

Daniel Paulos Nongena, talking about himself, who was tortured in King
William’s Town, 1963 up to 1975.

Makhi Boyi talking about himself, torture in King William’s Town from
1963 to 1966.

Mvuzo Johnson Nongena who will be talking about himself. He was tortured
in King William’s Town from 1963 to 1975.

Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Ms Maya.

Will you all please stand up to give respect to those who passed away:
Nombulelo Siyo, Zalisile Ernest Matyolo, Vuyani Patsa, Nancy Vera Mzini,
Thembalakhe George Lipota Marai, Funeka Nobantu Ngange and Nomriti
Nombande Ngange, Kenneth Masibonge Mfono, Mbbulelo Archie Mbelekana Lizo
Desmond Bata.

May they rest in peace, O Lord.

CHAIRPERSON: We will call Malabishe Jackson Bani.

MS MAYA: Malabishe Jackson Bani. Is he here ?

