						1			 S MATHINZINI


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.05.1997		

NAME: 	SIYALANA MATHINZINI

CASE:	EC0308/96CCK	

HELD AT:	KING WILLIAM’S TOWN

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________________



SIYALANA MATHINZINI : (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: You may sit down Sir, thank you. We welcome you. We will
hand over to Ms Maya to lead you with questions on behalf of the
Commission.

MS MAYA: Thank you Mr Chairperson .Mr Mathinzini you are here to-day to
talk about what happened to you on the 15th of May. Is that correct ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes that is correct.

MS MAYA: Where are you from Sir ?.

MR MATHINZINI: I’m from Mxhalanga Location .

MS MAYA: Please tell us briefly what happened to you, Sir.

MR MATHINZINI: My house was burnt down. I was inside the house. They
poured petrol in my house.

MS MAYA: What happened before that, Sir ?.

MR MATHINZINI: I arrived from Johannesburg in 1992. I was then elected as
a Chairperson of the School Committee. I agreed to take that position.
After a while I found out that the people were against Mr Booi. They
wanted him to be dismissed. As a School Committee we said that we have to
have a meeting so that we can discuss this issue.

MS MAYA: Who are these people who were, who wanted Mr Booi to be
dismissed ?.

MR MATHINZINI: They were people from Mxhalanga Location. They wouldn’t go
the principal to tell him that they were against him. When the
Councillors’ houses were burnt down, my house was also burnt down. They
threw stones in my house. They said that I was on the School Committee, I
was also involved in the Community. The people from 6 villages came to my
house to burn down my house.

MS MAYA: Why was your house burnt down when the Councillors’ houses were
burnt down.

MR MATHINZINI: The reason is that they said that as a Chairperson of the
School Committee, I have a lot to say, because I told them to come
forward to say that they were against the Principal.

MS MAYA: Can you please explain to us, what was happening in the
Community, between the Councillors and the people?

MR MATHINZINI: The people are against the Councillors.

MS MAYA: What was the connection between you and the Councillors.

MR MATHINZINI: There was no connection.

MS MAYA: Were you a member of any political or residents association?	

MR MATHINZINI: I was an ANC member. I joined the ANC in Johannesburg, but
because I was on that teacher’s side, people did not like me. I would
accompany the teacher to the Councillor’s house, to the Headman house as
the as the Chairperson of the School Committee. That’s how I got involved.

MS MAYA: Was it the usual thing that the teacher would go to the Headman
to report what was happening at school ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes.

MS MAYA: Mr Booi, was he a member of any organization ?.

MR MATHINZINI: I don’t know, but he used to say that he was not a member
of an ADM, PAC or ANC. He supported all the organizations because he was
the principal of the school.

MS MAYA: According to your statement you said that you were accused of
being a member of the ADM. Is that correct?

MR MATHINZINI: Yes, that’s what they said but I told them that I don’t
even have a member, a membership card of ADM.

MS MAYA: What was the damage in your house ?.

MR MATHINZINI: My furniture got burnt down. My leg was, I broke my leg.

MS MAYA: What happened exactly ?.

MR MATHINZINI: As we are staying in the villages, our windows are high. I
tried to jump from a window, I then fell down. That’s why, that’s how I
got injured.

MS MAYA: Your house was burnt down. You were trying to escape through a
window. You then broke your leg. What time was it ?.

MR MATHINZINI: It was about 8 in the evening.

MS MAYA: Did you notice any people.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes, I did.

MS MAYA: Do you have their names ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes, I do.

MS MAYA: We will like you to give these names to our investigating team.
Is that all, Sir ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes, that is all. That’s what they’ve done to me. I tried
to re-build my house, but I don’t have money. When I came back from
Johannesburg I had R17.000-00. I paid for my daughter’s wedding. I was
not working at that time.

MS MAYA: What are your requests to the Commission Sir ?.

MR MATHINZINI: I would like to be helped to re-build my house. I also
have 2 boys who are still at school.

MS MAYA: How old are they ?.

MR MATHINZINI: One was born in 1975. The other one in 1979.

MS MAYA: Are these your sons ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes.

MS MAYA: In which standards are they at school ?.

MR MATHINZINI: They are doing Std 9 and the other one is doing Std 8.

MS MAYA: You said that you saw these people. Did you lay a charge against
them ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes.

MS MAYA: Were they prosecuted ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes.

MS MAYA: What happened to that case ?.

MR MATHINZINI: It was said that there was not enough evidence because
this happened at night.

MS MAYA: Did you go to any attorney for advice ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes, I did.

MS MAYA: What then happened ?.

MR MATHINZINI: The case is still on, but I don’t know what’s happening,
because this happened a long time ago ?.

MS MAYA: Who is this attorney ?.

MR MATHINZINI: Mr Dorrington. The lawyers would change from one lawyer to
the other. In March I was told that the case will be on. When I got
there, they said that it was postponed, but I according to myself, I
think that they will not help me.

MS MAYA: You were still talking about your requests.

MR MATHINZINI: My goats were also burnt down.

MS MAYA: You have requests about your children and your house.

MR MATHINZINI: Yes.

MS MAYA: I have one other question, Sir. The teacher you mentioned. Do
you know of any reason for the people to be against him ?. What did he do
?.

MR MATHINZINI: They said that he was incompetent and they accused him of
corruption. I told them that I came back from Johannesburg in January
1993. I was not aware of these allegations.

MS MAYA: What happened to the teacher ?.

MR MATHINZINI: The teacher is still around. He is still in that school.

MS MAYA: Thank you, Sir. I will hand over to the Chairperson.

MS MAYA: Maybe, you will be asked further questions.

	Mr Chairperson, thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: I would like to thank you, Sir, for coming here and giving
testimony. We know that this period was a difficult period. People were
angry. They would do something to people who are not supposed to be
involved. I thank you for your testimony. We thank you for trusting the
Commission, because you gave us your testimony and the Commission will
try and report to the President, because we are only here to gather
information and forward it to the President, so that the President can
see what we do for the people. We thank you for coming here and giving
testimony. Thank you.

MS MAYA: Thank you Sir, you may go back to your seat.

