				 	1		 	


				 	

TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.05.1997			

NAME: 	JOHNSON NONGENA 	

CASE:	EC1986/97KMT		

HELD AT:	KING WILLIAM’S TOWN

DAY 3

________________________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Please come up. What’s Nabo’s full name ? Let me help you
take an oath. Johnson Nongena, please stand up.

JOHNSON NONGENA: (sworn states)

MASIXOLE SKIET: (sworn states)

L IZO NABO: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: We did call you your names before, but you were not here, so
we would like you to be brief because we have to go to Cape Town to
attend a meeting. I will start with you, Mr Johnson Nongena. You are a
member of PAC?

MR NONGENA: Yes, that is so.

CHAIRPERSON: It was banned in 1960.

MR NONGENA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: In 1963, it started fighting against the Government ?

MR NONGENA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: On the 8th of April 1963, something happened, which led to
your presence here to-day.

MR NONGENA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Please tell us what happened Sir.

MR NONGENA: We were 17 people here in town who got arrested. We were
going to attack boers in the charge office. I was one of the leaders of
that group. The boers were treating us badly at the time. When we arrived
in the charge office, the gate was too small. I was one of the people who
entered first.

CHAIRPERSON: Were you armed ?

MR NONGENA: Yes, with axes.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you have any petrol bombs ?

MR NONGENA: No, we did not have any petrol bombs. When we entered the
charge office, there was one young man Njopo. There were other leaders
who were arrested before. They were in that charge office. I went
straight to the charge office. We were to attack the charge office. The
boers ran away when they saw us because we were armed. I recognized one
of them. He had a gun in his hand. I had a petrol bomb and an assegai. I
threw that assegai. He was, he was standing 15 metres away from me. The
other men had ran away. Njopo was the only one, who was there with me.
When I was about to leave, I got shot and I was struck in my leg. I then
tried to run away. When we were about to reach a corner, I could not run
any longer. There was blood, I tried to hide, in a rubbish bin. After a
while I saw them with a torch, I hought it was in the morning. It was at
about 1 in the morning. I thought that he did not see me. He passed me,
he then came back. He said, come out Poqo. We were known as Poqo at the
time. He talked Afrikaans, saying that, come out Poqo.

	There were three men, black men, Coetzee and another police. I don’t
know his name. They asked for weapons. I told them that I did not have
any weapons with me. I could not walk. This black man helped me. Coetzee
said that he must not help me, he must leave me. This man said that I
cannot leave him there.

CHAIRPERSON: You were then arrested ? You were handcuffed and you were
taken to prison.

MR NONGENA: They handcuffed me at that time. I then sat down.

CHAIRPERSON: And Joubert(?) was also assaulted. When you sent to
Queenstown ?

MR NONGENA: We were arrested in King William’s Town. There was a lot of
us and we were divided. One group went to King William’s Town. We’d go up
here at the Judge, now and again but even there it was postponed,
transferred to Grahamstown until we were sentenced.

CHAIRPERSON: Twelve years.

MR NONGENA: 12 years.

CHAIRMAN: Judge Cloetze sentenced you.?

J NONGENA: Yes, Judge Cloetze.

CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, you went to Robben Island ?

MR NONGENA: Yes, but we went via Port Elizabeth. We stayed there for
about two, three weeks and then to Robben Island.

CHAIRPERSON: Your health deteriorated at the island ?

MR NONGENA: I was, I would go to Cape Town. They wanted me to work at the
prison, but I couldn’t because my joints were affected. I could not even
walk properly. Fago, who passed on would help me walk.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you see a doctor in prison ?

MR NONGENA: There was a doctor in the prison that would examine me. It
was difficult even to sleep. I was bent. I told this man that if I go to
work, I won’t come back. If they forced me what I’d do is, I would send
someone to tell the boers that it was too difficult for me.

CHAIRPERSON: So what eventually happened ? How were your released ?

MR NONGENA: These men, I was then told to go to ....(indistinct)... for
the sick. It is on this day that I was sent through to Cape Town when a
plaster of paris was put around me. After a month, it was removed. It was
from my upper chest to my waist. They removed it because it was too
painful.

CHAIRPERSON: Perhaps you can show us later.

MR NONGENA: I went here to other doctors who examined me. I wore another
plaster of paris.

CHAIRPERSON: You were released in 1975 ?

MR NONGENA: Yes, I was released in 1975.

CHAIRPERSON: Your request to the Commission is that you’d like the
Commission to tell the President that you got injured while you were in
the struggle.

MR NONGENA: Yes, that is correct.

CHAIRPERSON: You also would like a project to be started in your area, in
order to encourage people ?

MR NONGENA: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Did I leave out something ?

MR NONGENA: Coetzee, I would like him to come forward to apologize, to
ask for forgiveness, it you he is still alive.

CHAIRPERSON: If Coetzee’s still alive, you want him to come and apologize
?

MR NONGENA: Yes, because Charles came to me and he came to apologize and
I forgave him. I would like Coetzee to come forward, if he’s still alive
and apologize.

CHAIRPERSON: If he is still alive, we are going to tell him to come
forward because there won’t be peace between yourself and him. Thank you,
Mr Nongena.

	Mr Sandi will lead Masixole with questions.

MR SANDI: Perhaps we could start with Lizo Nabo. Mr Nabo we heard twice
about this incident. I don’t think that we should go into too much
detail, but briefly tell us please, how you are affected at home.

MR NABO: We moved from Bluerock, 1981 or 82.

MR SANDI: Mr Nabo, you were beaten up that day.

MR NABO: We got such problems, beaten with, by sjamboks but they were not
severe. The problem was at Potsdam. We had to leave Potsdam as a result.
When we left, we had a meeting. I then had to leave and stand outside
because we thought they were going to destroy the venue. As I was
outside, there were people who ran away and went to the travel police
station. They had weapons. They said we must raise our hands.

MR SANDI: Is this the time you were beaten ? How did they torture you.

MR NABO: They tied me, my hands behind my back, they said I must divulge
where the meeting was.

MR SANDI: Where you able to take them ?

MR NABO: I’d refused. I said I don’t know, they must go to the person who
said there was a meeting. They took me to Shebeens, they asked people in
the Shebeen if I was the one. I was identified as such. They hit me with
guns, beating me up.

MR SANDI: As a result of this you got terribly injured.

MR NABO: Yes, on my head, also my one eye does not see well because I was
beaten up.

MRS SANDI: Do you get any form of treatment ?

MR NABO: Yes.

MR SANDI: Are you still under treatment ?

MR NABO: Now and again.

MR SANDI: So, you lost some of your furniture.

MR NABO: Yes. My stuff was terribly damaged.

MR SANDI: Mr Nabo, we’re not going to go into too much detail, but you
request that your children be educated, you need help.

MR NABO: Yes, because I do not work. I lost my job at the Post Office in
1987.

MR SANDI: Where do you stay now ?

MR NABO: In Mount Ruth, in a shack.

MR SANDI: You have a request that the Government may perhaps build you a
house.

MR NABO: Yes.

MR SANDI: Three children you have ?

MR NABO: The fourth one is very, very small.

MR SANDI: Is that all, Mr Nabo ?

MR NABO: Yes.

MR SANDI: Thank you. Masixole! Masixole, you are here to talk about
yourself ?

M SKIET: Yes, that is correct Sir.

MR SANDI: You go, you’re going to talk about what happened to you in
1993. You were 17 years old then.

MR SKIET: Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI: What happened in 1993 ?

MR SKIET: I was from Dimbaza and I was going back home. I heard that the
soldiers were in my home in the, during the day. They assaulted my
grandfather. At night while we were still sleeping, we heard that the,
the soldiers threw a bomb in my home. I then went to my grandfather’s
bedroom to check at him. I got injured in that process. I was taken to
the hospital.

MR SANDI: Are you talking about that day when a hand grenade was through
in, was thrown in your home ?

MR SKIET: Yes.

MR SANDI: This happened during the conflict between ANC and ADM.

MR SKIET: Yes.

MR SANDI: Are you getting medical treatment now ?

MR SKIET: No.

MR SANDI: Is there a need for you to get a medical treatment ?

MR SKIET: When it is very cold, I do feel pains.

MR SANDI: Do you have any requests, Masixole, concerning this matter ?



M SKIET: I would like the Commission to help me to get some more medical
treatment.

MR SANDI: At home, was there anyone who was politically active ?

MR SKIET: It was my grandfather.

MR SANDI: This all happened because your grandfather took part in
politics.

MR SKIET: Yes.

MR SANDI: And there was this conflict between ANC and ADM ?

MR SKIET: Yes.

MR SANDI: Are you at school ?

MR SKIET: Yes.

MR SANDI: In which standard are you ?

MR SKIET: I’m doing Standard 8.

MR SANDI: Is that all you wanted to say ?

MR SKIET: Yes, that is all.

MR SANDI: Thank you, Masixole. Thank you, Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank the three of you, we have noted your requests. As
you are our last witnesses, you’ll wait a minute, so that I can thank all
the people who took part in our second-last hearing in this region. Our
last hearing will be in East London, next month and, we thank the
Municipality of the area, we thank the Police, the Priests and the
interpreters who were working very hard. We thank the media, the radio
people, the staff of the Commission and the members of the panel. Most of
all, we would like to thank the victims because, without them we won’t
have any hearings. I thank everybody. Our hearing here in King William’s
Town is now closed. We’ll meet in East London on

our last hearing.

MR SANDI: Mr Chairperson, we would like to thank you because you led us
in this hearing. Thank you very much for your leadership.













































