	1	E LEDWABA


	1	E LEDWABA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.08.1996	NAME:	ELIZABETH LEDWABA

CASE:	JB01020	-	PRETORIA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Before I hand over to Dr Boraine, we would like to welcome
Nico Smit who has been living in Mamelodi and we thank you for your
Ministry and witness. Stand so that we can give you a small clap.

DR BORAINE: The next witness is Mrs Elizabeth Ledwaba and I would ask her
to please come forward. Mrs Ledwaba, can you hear me on the earphones
alright? Let me repeat that. Can you hear my voice and the voice of the
interpreter. Just help her. Take your time. There is no hurry. I just
want to make absolutely sure you can hear me. Alright, let us try again
now. Can you hear my voice? Let me try it again. Can you hear my voice on
the earphone? Alright, let me try again now. Can you hear my voice at all.

MRS LEDWABA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: You can. There we go. Alright, Mrs Ledwaba, I apologise, I am
sorry that you had so much difficulty in trying to hear. We are very
pleased to welcome you here today. You are almost the last person. You
would have been the last person, but there is someone who was here
yesterday so we will hear that person as well, but thank you for waiting
for so long. You have a terrible story to tell. A very sad and awful one,
but before you do that would you please stand to take the oath.

ELIZABETH LEDWABA: (Duly sworn in, states).

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	E LEDWABA

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much indeed. My colleague, Mr Russell Ally is
going to lead you as you tell your story about the killing and the
bombings in 1986. I hand over to him now.

DR ALLY: Welcome to you Mama. You can hear me?

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, I can hear you.

DR ALLY: Who is sitting next to you? Is that a family member sitting next
to you?

MRS LEDWABA: This is Julian and he is my son.

DR ALLY: Welcome to him as well.

MRS LEDWABA: This is my son whom the bomb was thrown into his window.

DR ALLY: You are going to speak about Walter. So I would ask you now if
you can please tell us your story. Thank you.

MRS LEDWABA: Which year was it again? Which year was it again? It was in
1986 at about two o' clock and a bomb was thrown through the bedroom
window in which this boy was sleeping in. That bomb made a funny sound
before it exploded and then I went to the kitchen door and opened it.
This thing started making a funny sound and exploded. That is the bomb
that they threw in through the bedroom window he was sleeping in. He woke
up and he ran into the dining room. That is where I woke up and tried to
go to his bedroom. The other boys, that is Walter and Oupa, were sleeping
in the dining room. This one woke up and he ran to the dining room.

	When the other two woke up who were sleeping under the table in the
dining room instead of running to the other side they went to the bedroom
where the bomb was and these nails struck Walter and Oupa. It was about
two o' clock in

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	E LEDWABA

the morning. The doors went flying and the roof also went flying because
of the bullets that were being shot. There was a bit of dust in the house
and we were worried what was happening. When I opened the doors there
were many soldiers outside. There were so many of them in my yard and
they said to me, where are your children lady. I said which children of
mine. I said the children of yours who are having a bomb in the house and
I said to them how can they sleep with a bomb whilst I am with them in
the house. I had not seen that bomb. How can that happen and they said,
yes, these children of yours are having a bomb in their possession. There
were many soldiers, that is white soldiers, there were no black soldiers
at that time.

	This boys room burned and we tried to fetch water and pour it over the
wardrobe so that we can extinguish the fire. We could not see each other
in the house because there was a bit of dust in the house because my
husband was deaf he woke up later whilst the soldiers were already full
in the house. When the neighbours tried to come in they refused them
entry and they had parked their Hippos at the corner of the street so
that no one could see them. They took these children and they claimed
that they had to go to the hospital. When my son tried to take my
children to the hospital the police, the soldiers refused and they said
they are waiting for a police ambulance or a Hippo. We waited from two o'
clock and they came at six o' clock to pick up the children. The window
glasses was scattered all around the house.

	When they come to pick up Walter with the Hippo at about six o' clock
Walter died when he reached the hospital and this one I am remaining with
is Oupa. He has an injured PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	E LEDWABA

leg, he has a zinc in his leg and his other arm is not functioning well
also. That is all I can say because I am being hurt by this when I am
speaking at the moment.

DR ALLY: I am just going to ask you a few questions just to help us with
our work. You say that there were many other bomb attacks in others
houses, in other streets that time in Atteridgeville. Can you just tell
us, if you can, a little bit about what was happening in Atteridgeville
at that time with police action against Comrades or against the youth?
Could you just tell us a little about that?

MRS LEDWABA: When people had gone to funerals there were many Hippos.
People were not even able to eat after the funerals because the police
and the soldiers were shooting teargas. I buried my son with the help of
the Church congregation. When we left for the cemetery the Hippos were
also accompanying us, but we were able to bury the child. They did not
disturb us during the funeral. Now we thank this organisation that is
affording us this opportunity to tell our story.

DR ALLY: Walter, he was your grandson. Is that correct?

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, was.

DR ALLY: And how old was he?

MRS LEDWABA: I was staying with both of them.

DR ALLY: And how old was Walter when he died?

MRS LEDWABA: I think he was about 17 years old.

DR ALLY: And is Julian the same, is Julian also Oupa because in your
statement you say Julian and Walter were injured. Is Julian and Oupa the
same person?

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, Oupa is also Julian.

DR ALLY: He is the one who was injured and he is still injured today.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	E LEDWABA

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, it is so.

DR ALLY: And Walter did not die straight away. You said that you tried to
take him to the hospital, but the soldiers did not want you to take him.

MRS LEDWABA: When the Hippo came to take us to the hospital at six o'
clock, he did not even reach the hospital ward and he died because they
had made him stay almost all night refusing us the opportunity to take
him to the hospital by car. He was rolling on all the window glasses that
had broken by that time. There were so many soldiers in the yard and they
refused us the permission to take him to the hospital. That is from two
o' clock up until six o' clock. When this Hippo came these bullets from
the bomb had pierced his stomach.

DR ALLY: Did they give you any reasons for you not taking him to the
hospital? Why did they not want you to take him to the hospital?

MRS LEDWABA: No, they said we were not supposed to take him to the
hospital on our own. They were waiting for a Hippo to take him to the
hospital and we said to them, these children have been injured since two
o' clock, do they have to wait for the Hippo to come and fetch them. Then
they said to me the Hippo will arrive in a short while and this Hippo
arrived at about six o' clock and it was already a long time since these
young boys had been rolling all over these glass windows.

DR ALLY: Was there ever a police investigation or any investigation into
the bombing of your house?

MRS LEDWABA: No, nothing at all.

DR ALLY: And you still have not been given a death certificate of Walter
because in your statement you say

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	E LEDWABA

there was no death certificate. Is that still the situation now?

MRS LEDWABA: No, they did not give me a death certificate. I do not have
it in my possession.

DR ALLY: And after this event did you have anymore trouble with the
police? Did they still harass you and come to the house? What happened
after Walter's death?

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, they still come to my house. They are looking for the
uncle to these young boys and they ended up killing his uncle and since
then the police have not visited me anymore.

DR ALLY: Sorry, can you say, they killed his uncle.

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, they also killed his uncle.

DR ALLY: Walter's uncle. How did he die?

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, it is Walter's uncle and he was killed by the police.
Maybe he was on his way to Johannesburg, I think, going to the offices of
a certain organisation and they shot him on his way to Johannesburg.

DR ALLY: Thank you very much Mama.

CHAIRPERSON: Any further questions? Tom Manthata.

MR MANTHATA: Mrs Ledwaba, this story you are telling us is almost similar
to the one of Oupa Masuku that we heard on Monday. Did you know Oupa or
was Oupa known to your children?

MRS LEDWABA: Who do you mean?

MR MANTHATA: I mean Oupa Masuku.

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, he knew Skwitch. Oupa Masuku, yes, he knew Skwitch.

MR MANTHATA: I thank you.

MRS LEDWABA: And I was telling him on Sunday that you Masuku you no more
come to visit me and comfort me and check PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	E LEDWABA

on how I am living and he said he was not available, he had gone overseas
by then.

CHAIRPERSON: Mam, what can one say. We have no words to comfort you
because whilst you are speaking, you are speaking about one grandson.
There are two children of yours who have been killed.

MRS LEDWABA: They are all three including their uncle. They did not put
their uncle's name in the statement.

CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying is maybe you are feeling very weak.

MRS LEDWABA: Yes, I am losing hope.

CHAIRPERSON: You do not even know what to say about what we are saying to
you, trying to comfort you, but all the same we have a very true court,
the court who can speak, the court who is not blind. Even though we had
problems we use to say to our people God can see what has happened to
you, He can hear what is happening to you. One day He as He did to the
Israelites or to the children of Israel, he would come and lead us and
release us and give us freedom. It looked as if we were dreaming by that
time and what we were saying was not true and we also said let us all
know that we are not going to easily get what we need. We are going to
have to go through many troubles before most people are going to be sent
to prisons, many are going to be killed and it is a very hurting thing to
have two young people dying from your family and remaining with a
cripple. We all say to you we have God who takes care of everyone and He
is the one who can heal us. He is the very same one we are asking today
to smooth your wounds. I thank you. I wish that He could be the one who
would heal you, take care of your wounds with his Holy bandage. We thank
you. We say you

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	E LEDWABA

bore us heroes because today we are being looked at as people and we are
proud of ourselves. We thank you.

	------------------------------

























































PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

