	1	H LEKGARI


	1	H LEKGARI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: 	HERMAN LEKGARI

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Johannes, welcome. You have come to talk about your son,
Johannes Lekgari, who at the time of his death, was 24 years old.

HERMAN LEKGARI: (sworn states)

DR RANDERA: Will you please in your own words and in your own time tell
us what happened to your son?

MR LEKGARI: My son was on leave on that day. There was a march at
Drihatsi, where he was. He was a soldier but on that day he was on leave.
When he was together with his friends, one was shot and he was shot with
the teargas. When he tried to run home he fell on the way and the
attackers killed him and he didn't reach home.

	That is what happened to him.

DR RANDERA: Mr Lekgari is that all you want to say before I pose a few
questions to you?

MR LEKGARI: Yes, I am through because that is the only thing that
happened to him. Up until I buried him, there was no investigation and
nothing happened also after his burial. Up until now I came to the
Commission and reported to the Commission. But the truth is he was killed
by teargas.

DR RANDERA: Mr Lekgari, just tell us a bit more about Gwaneng. I know you
say he was a soldier, but was he involved in any of the political
structures in your area?

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	H LEKGARI

MR LEKGARI: Yes, he was active in politics.

DR RANDERA: Can you tell us a little more, when you say he was active in
politics.

MR LEKGARI: He worked together with the political organization when they
were at the rally, but he also had his full time job.

DR RANDERA: Which political organization was he working with?

MR LEKGARI: He worked for the ANC. He was a member of the ANC.

DR RANDERA: I want to come back to this tear gassing incident. He was
coming home from a rally when this happened. Is that right?

MR LEKGARI: He was shot with the teargas at the rally and when he tried
to run home, he fell because of this teargas. He didn't reach home. He
fell along the way.

DR RANDERA: Mr Lekgari can you please tell, us was your son - did he have
any chest problems? Did he suffer from asthma or bronchitis?

MR LEKGARI: No, he didn't have any illnesses in him.

DR RANDERA: He was completely healthy?

MR LEKGARI: Yes, he was healthy. He never had any illnesses.

DR RANDERA: Thank you, Mr Lekgari.

MS SEROKE: Mr Herman, did the call you to come and see him?

MR LEKGARI: He fell close to Mr Voji's house. When I went to see him he
had already been removed. I went to see him in the hospital. They took
him to Mr Voji's house and they took him to hospital. They also realised
that there was no life in him and the police came and they took him away.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	3	H LEKGARI

MS SEROKE: Was there a post-mortem conducted?

MR LEKGARI: Yes, there was a post-mortem at the hospital. And then I
buried him without any help.

MS SEROKE: Did you receive a letter, stating the post-mortem results?

MR LEKGARI: No, I didn't receive any letter.

MS SEROKE: I thank you.

MR MANTHATA: It is cruel to experience that in a family. It is very
hurtful. And it is also very hurting when that comes the way it
approached to you. You didn't know how your child died or who killed him.
We might say it was the police who killed him because by that time people
were from the rally.

	We sympathise with you for what he went through and we will try to find
out what really happened to your child and to make sure that the
investigations are being conducted.

	We would like to thank you.

	---------------

