	1	J M LERUTLA


	1	J M LERUTLA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.08.1996	NAME:	JOHANNA MAMORIRI LERUTLA

CASE:	JB00787	-	PRETORIA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: Lerutla. Good afternoon Mrs Lerutla. Mrs Lerutla, can you
hear me. Okay. I am very big and you are very small so you are going to
have to come as close to the microphone as possible so that we can hear
you. You see I have to bend down and you have to bend up. We want to
welcome you very warmly and apologise to you for the delay. There just
seems to have a two people of the same surname, but so I can make
absolutely sure. Have you come to tell us about your son Matthews Lerutla.

MRS LERUTLA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Okay, thank you very much. We want to welcome you very warmly
and you, too, have brought somebody with you. Can you introduce that
person to us please? Who is the person sitting next to you?

MRS LERUTLA: It is Johanna Mamoriri Lerutla.

DR BORAINE: No, wait a minute. You are Johanna, right?

MRS LERUTLA: Lerutla.

DR BORAINE: And who is with you, sitting next to you?

MRS LERUTLA: Rebecca. She is my sister. The person seated next to me is
my sister, Rebecca. It is Rebecca Lerutla.

DR BORAINE: And she is your sister?

MRS LERUTLA: Yes, she is my sister.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Rebecca, we want to welcome you too and
let, while I am about it, let me also

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	J M LERUTLA

welcome the briefer and let me say that the person who accompanies the
witness is there to assist the witness in any way possible and we have
are always very pleased to have that person alongside as someone who can
be of assistance. Now ...

CHAIRPERSON: And just check the surname.

DR BORAINE: ... Mrs Lerutla could , it is L E R U T L A? Is that correct?

MRS LERUTLA: Yes, the name is correct.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. The Archbishop keeps telling me to check
all these things, but now we have got it all right. Can you please stand
to take the oath.

JOHANNA MAMORIRI LERUTLA: (Duly sworn in, states).

DR BORAINE: Order please. Can you settle down please. Alright, I am
assuming that you have now taken the oath, that you have promised to tell
the truth and nothing, but the truth. Thank you very much. Mrs Lerutla,
as you know, we always ask one of the Commissioners to help a person
telling that story. Today it is my turn and I am going to ask you just a
few questions. You are going to tell us the story of Matthews Lerutla who
was a young man living in Mamelodi and will you not please tell us what
happened to him.

MRS LERUTLA: May I start? Matthews Lerutla, when we were at Lerutla he
use to study at Mamelodi. I want to tell of you that this child he had
nothing to eat at school on that day. Now he decided to eat with his
friends at school. When I came back from work on that day, as I
approached the corner I saw him standing at the gate. Now, I wondered why
he looks at me in that manner. He said people that I was eating with at
school, they are no longer at school. So I

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	J M LERUTLA

said, I borrowed money from my employees. My employers, then he left to
buy food, but I was informed that he is hanging around at the shops. The
time passed by until we slept.

	The following morning I went to the Principal and asked, I cannot see my
son. The Principal now said we must go and find out from his class
teacher, maybe from the classroom. I even went to the policemen and
informed them that my child is missing. Then when they asked I said it
was yesterday when this happened. Even today the police never came to me.
Since 1987 until 1996 my child has not yet come home.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Just a few questions please. First, how
old was your son when he disappeared.

MRS LERUTLA: He was born in 1970 and disappeared in 1987.

DR BORAINE: So he was 17 years old and you have never seen him since that
day.

MRS LERUTLA: Yes, that is so.

DR BORAINE: Did you talk to any of his friends to find out if they knew
where he was?

MRS LERUTLA: I asked everybody, but they did not know where he was.

DR BORAINE: You said you went to the Mamelodi Police Station to ask them
to please help you to find your son, but you heard nothing?

MRS LERUTLA: Yes, I went to Mamelodi Police Station, but I found nothing
up to, so far they have never informed me.

DR BORAINE: Can you tell me, you know, we have listened to many people
all over the country whose sons or daughters disappeared. Did you visit a
hospital or did you go to the mortuary, did you look, I am sure you must
have searched to

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	J M LERUTLA

find him?

MRS LERUTLA: I did look for him. Even to his friends in Johannesburg, I
asked them to look for my son. He said to me when I failed my test, you
must not work. Actually when I finish my studies you must not work, I
must work for you because today I am struggling, but his friends have
finished their studies. They are working at the moment.

DR BORAINE: Was your son linked with any political party?

MRS LERUTLA: He was one of the Comrades.

DR BORAINE: So he, I assume you mean he was a member of the ANC?

MRS LERUTLA: Because of my age I cannot tell.

DR BORAINE: Did you check with the ANC office, at all, to find out if
they knew where he was?

MRS LERUTLA: No, I did not.

DR BORAINE: You are not sure whether he left the country or you just
simply do not know what happened to him?

MRS LERUTLA: At the moment I do not know where he is. I cannot tell
whether he skipped the country or not. I still have his memory even at
the moment. Even at the wardrobe I sometimes look through his clothes. It
is difficult to forget him. One day I even took this clothing to wash
them. When I tried to iron them I found people in my yard. I did not know
what they were doing.

DR BORAINE: Please do not worry Mrs Lerutla, take your time. It is a very
sad, sad thing to remember. Could I ask you, finally, is there anything
that you would ask the Commission to do for you? As the Chairperson has
explained, we cannot do everything, but there are certain things that we
might be able to do. Is there anything that you would like to ask the
Commission to do?

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	J M LERUTLA

MRS LERUTLA: I would like the Commission to assist me because I have a
difficult time at the moment.

DR BORAINE: I would be grateful if people using flash photographs should
not do that again please. Do not take photographs. I can see that you are
very upset and you have finished your story, but I am going to ask the
Chairperson if there are any others who would like to ask a question.

CHAIRPERSON: Mam, we want to direct our sympathies to you. Do not think
that even now whilst you are telling us about what happened, we have
heard that you, when you look at his clothes you imagine people around at
home and you imagine him to be in the home. We can see that you are going
through a difficult time. People usually say that sometimes it is always
easy for a person who is living nice to tell others about the difficult
times they went through. We sympathise with you even though we have not
directly been touched or experienced what happened to you. We also thank
you for still being among those people who did these bad things to you
especially because most of us come from families that had difficult times
because of the pressure of the past regime.

	We would like you to please accept from us that we sympathise with you
and we send our condolences to you. We say unto you may the Almighty God
please bless you and comfort you. As a Commission we have been put here
to investigate or to do everything in our means to trace the whereabouts
of those who went missing. We will try in whatever way we can to trace
Matthews if at all he is still alive. It is always bad even if he had
died that you get informed of what happened to him because maybe your
pain is being brought about by the fact that you do not know whether
PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	J M LERUTLA

he is still alive or not. We as a Commission, we are going to try to help
you to trace Matthews or to establish whether he is still alive or not.

	I think one of the things that this Commission is doing, as we listen to
the harrowing stories that we have heard here, we hear in other places,
is to remind us that we are not talking about statistics. You know,
sometimes when you read in a newspaper, you hear two children disappeared
and maybe as a kind of defence mechanism, they are just numbers, but now
and again when we come to hear testimony of this kind, we are reminded
that we are talking about people of flesh and blood. That they are not
just numbers. They are the son of, they are the daughter of, they are the
mother of, they are the father of. It is people of flesh and blood. It is
a Matthews who had a mother who loved him, who still washes his clothes
and when she looks at clothes in a shop window that would have fitted her
son, breaks down. That is part of the hurt and the anguish, the pain of
what has happened in this land and it is part of that pain that we are
asked to assist in healing.

	It also just keeps reminding us that young people in this land paid a
very heavy price for the freedom that we are now enjoying and that it was
so called "ordinary people". There are no "ordinary people". Everybody is
a very special person, but we often speak of "ordinary people". Often and
often it was they who have had to bear the brunt of all of this awfulness
and maybe we will all keep bearing in mind, we got this freedom and the
price that was paid was a very high price and that, for goodness sake, we
will not want to devalue it and we are asked to remember this past
because we want to commit ourselves to saying that PRETORIA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	J M LERUTLA

things of this kind never happen again in our land.

	I think we should adjourn for lunch. Will you please stand. Please, yes,
can you. Order please. Nobody should move around. Thank you. We will
resume at two.

	------------------------------





















































PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

