	1	E S LOKWALENG


	1	E S LOKWALENG

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: EVA S LOKWALENG

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: 	I know that you are going to tell us about what happened to
you nephew and I am sure it is a very painful story, because he died in
July 1986 when you yourself was in detention.

	Mr Tom Manthata will be leading you in telling your story, but before he
does that, can you please stand and take the oath?

EVA LOKWALENG: (sworn states)

MR MANTHATA: Could you tell us what happened to your family when this
nephew of you was killed?

MS LOKWALENG: Yes, I carry on and tell you what happened. At the
beginning of the year, this boy belonged to the UDF. The police would
arrive at his place. His mother used to tell me that they were being
terrorised, the children could not sleep. They were roaming around the
township. Then there came a time when the police came to arrest this boy
and they sent him to jail.

	Whilst he was in jail, because they were terrorising me regarding him
and they used to search my house for him and never explained to me what
they were looking for. I only heard later that they were looking for this
boy.

	Then one day, on a Sunday, whilst I was already asleep, together with
the other children, we heard a knock at the

at the door and I then asked who was at the door, they

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	E S LOKWALENG

answered by saying, it was the police. And then we went to open the door.

	When they entered the house it were white policemen, they asked who Eva
was. I said it was me and they said, wake up, put on your clothes and
accompany us. I asked them, where were you taking me. They said, don't
ask any question. Just wake up and dress and come together with us.

	I told them that tomorrow I have to go to school, and they said to me
no, come with us. You'll be given a chance to go to school.

	When I left the house I realised that they had many vans outside and
there was also a big Hippo in which I found some of us and I also
alighted that Hippo. And then we made jokes, asking one another, where
are we being taken to? And then they took us to the cells. I found other
people like Mrs Gashe and the other children who are present here and we
stayed there at the cells.

	We stayed there for about a month. When the schools were to open on the
following the day, on the 14th they took us and transferred us to
Kimberley.

	We stayed in Kimberley in July, in the middle of July, then I got the
message that this boy was killed and he died on the spot.

	They kept me in the cells from the 11th of June until September.

	I am finished, sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you say people died in jail? Beebop did he die in jail
or did he die in the street?

MS LOKWALENG: No, he died when he was shot in the street.

CHAIRPERSON: Where did they take him after they shot him? Did they
directly take him to the mortuary or to the MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH
WEST



	3	E S LOKWALENG

hospital?

MS LOKWALENG: I won't say that, because by that time I was in Kimberley.
When he died, I was in Kimberley. I was in detention and when he was
buried I was also not present. When I came back he was already buried.
Therefore, I have no evidence as to the proceedings at the funeral.

CHAIRPERSON: Why were you detained?

MS LOKWALENG: Every time the police came to my place they would explain
to me that I was conducting UDF meetings at my place and the boy's mother
she was one of the members of the Women's League and they would cook the
food for the youth and take the food to the prison. And when she came
back from the prison she would come and pay me a short visit.

	I think that is the reason that the police arrested me but they haven't
explained to me exactly why the detained me. When I came back from
Kimberley his mother explained to me that you are arrested on behalf of
Beebop because they wanted him everyday in your place and they couldn't
find him.

CHAIRPERSON: What were you working as then?

MS LOKWALENG: I was a teacher.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

DR RANDERA: Can you perhaps shed more light, sorry... How old was this
young man when he died?

MS LOKWALENG: I wasn't staying with him when he died, he was staying with
his mother. And I'm not sure about his date of birth and how old he was
when he died. But what I can tell you is that he already had a child with
his girlfriend, so I would think he was a teenager by then.

DR RANDERA: I know you were not there at the time of your nephew's death
but when you came out of prison what did his MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH
WEST



	4	E S LOKWALENG

mother say or what did other people say?

MS LOKWALENG: His mother told me that Beebop is late as you heard, whilst
you were in Kimberley. And she also explained to me that by the time when
they used to harass me at my place they were looking for Beebop, they
would think that I have sent him away or he was hiding in my house.

DR RANDERA: I'm not trying to make life difficult, but who shot him? I
mean, was he shot in the daytime, at night, in the yard. Who shot him?

MS LOKWALENG: His mother told me that he was shot by the police.

DR RANDERA: Did she lay a charge and was there an inquest held?

MS LOKWALENG: I'm not sure whether... I don't think, and I have never
heard her saying that she opened a case.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

MR MALAN: This happened in Huhudi.

MS LOKWALENG: Yes, sir.

MR MALAN: Do you know of any other persons who might have observed the
shooting. Is there any other people that we could speak to and get
information from. That maybe their could have been eye witnesses who
could have more information?

MS LOKWALENG: By the time that boy was shot I was not there, and from
when I came back from Kimberley I didn't ask any questions because let
bygones be bygones.

MR MALAN: Do you still live in Huhudi?

MS LOKWALENG: Yes.

MR MALAN: This was never discussed with anyone that have more
information? Your only communication was with the boy's mother. Is that
what you are saying?

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	5	E S LOKWALENG

MS LOKWALENG: Yes, I only spoke to his mother. We were just talking
together with the parents.

MR MALAN: Would there be other people in Huhudi still who might have
information if we tried to investigate this.

MS LOKWALENG: I think you can still ask, there are still two brothers and
a sister. May'be they know something.

MR MALAN: May I ask you then that after you stepped down from the table
there, to just give the names to one of our staff members so we can
approach the brothers and sister and see if they can get more
information. Thank you very much.

MS LOKWALENG: Thank you very much.

MR MANTHATA: You have worked very hard to talk of Beebop and Daphne's
family by coming to tell us about this story. It wasn't easy for you to
come and tell us this story, as things happened while you were jail. We
thank you for doing that and we say we will comfort you and we once more
thank you and would like you also, on our behalf, thank Beebop's family.

DR RANDERA: I would just like to, also make an appeal to people in Huhudi
following what my colleague, Mr Malan, said, if there are people who were
there and present at the time when this young man was shot, I think it
would help his aunt a great deal to understand and in some ways close a
chapter on that particular person. So if there are people

people, or if you know of people, please, statement takers are present
outside and there will be statement takers in Huhudi as well, who can
take statements from you. So I appeal to you again on their behalf.

	----------------

