
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	04.09.1996	NAME: MRS HLABASANE MARGARET LUBISI

CASE: 1326 		- NELSPRUIT



_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma Lubisi, can you hear me?

MRS LUBISI: Yes, I can hear you.

CHAIRPERSON: Before I ask you to tell your story, I am going to ask Mr
Lewin to ask you to take the oath, please.

MR LEWIN: Mamma Lubisi, if you could please stand.

HLABASANE MARGARET LUBISI: (sworn states).

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma, please make yourself comfortable. We would like to
welcome you to the Commission. I am going to help you with your story.
Will you please in your own words tell the Commission about what happened
to your son. Mamma, could you just hold on while we check. Nothing is
coming through - is it okay now? Thank you. Mamma, will you talk more
loudly so that everybody can hear you, please.

MRS LUBISI: 1990, July they shot my son at Matsolo. He was from the shop,
from Mayola Shop. When he was shot he never died instantly. Some people
ran to call Dr Mabusa and he was then removed to Ungondini Hospital. He
was shot on the 27th of that month. On the 28th he died. I was working
during that time. As I was going around, searching for him I could not
find him. Then I heard by rumour that someone has been shot and he is
unknown. Then we went to Dr Mabuso to check. The person working there
said no, they are alive and is promising that well, those that have been
shot, are alive. Then they told another person who was accompanying me
that they should not inform me. He did not tell me. Then we

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA

	2	LUBISI

went back home. As I was entering my house and then I said to my mother
well, my son is alive, it is promising. As I was walking out of my house
then the person who was accompanying me told my mother that well, the boy
has passed away. Then they said I should not inform him because otherwise
I could not be able to take him.

	The following day we went out together with Conrad Moyi. On our way we
requested a vehicle from Mr Mayole who went to Ungondini Hospital. On our
arrival there we had to ask. Then they said to us we should wait for one
moment. Then from there we were given a nurse who led us to the mortuary.
They opened there and then he was found there. He was found inside in the
mortuary. I only looked once and I could not, and I fell there. From
there I sat outside and from there they said to us now that he has been
found, go back home, we will remove him and take him to Nelspruit
mortuary. They need to do post-mortem on him on Wednesday. Then we went
back home.

	When we were at home the following day, on Wednesday, we went to the
police station. I was together with my sister who is also present here.
They took us to Nelspruit. On our arrival there at Nelspruit we waited at
the mortuary. As we were sitting there they called us. They said to us
the one who is brave should come in. Then we said well, we can come in.
As we entered the mortuary and they were just pulling him from - I looked
at once and I fainted there. They took me out. From there then the
funeral was then over. Then I wanted to find out, those people actually
who shot him, should come and see me. No, they don't come.

	Up to now nothing has happened.	Now up to now

nothing has happened. Now all the time if this boy was born

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA

	3	LUBISI

in 1973, June. Then I heard there will be a Truth Commission which could
perhaps assist. Then they gave me the direction.

	So this is the reason - then I went to give my statement to the people.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mamma. Just to make certain in our minds that we
have your story properly I am going to ask you a few questions. Could you
tell me, at the time when your son was shot, what was happening in the
township?

MRS LUBISI: The time when they shot my son it was during the riot times
and but he was not part of the people actually moving up and down. He was
from the shop.

CHAIRPERSON: So he had innocently gone to the shop and got shot in the
cross-fire?

MRS LUBISI: As he was moving out from the shop, he met a group of young
people running and then they shot at him.

CHAIRPERSON: Who actually shot him, Mamma?

MRS LUBISI: I am not sure actually, I think the sergeant, the sergeant at
the police station at Matzulu could know better.

CHAIRPERSON: How many days after he was shot did you finally find him?

MRS LUBISI: We found him after five days, as we were going around
searching for him.

CHAIRPERSON: After he was buried did you go and see any attorney to help
you?

MRS LUBISI: No, I didn't.

CHAIRPERSON: Did anybody else in the community not help you to find out
what had happened to him and why he was shot?

MRS LUBISI: No, no one.

CHAIRPERSON: So to this day you have never been able to

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA

	4	LUBISI

find out why he was shot?

MRS LUBISI: Yes, up to now I don't know the reasons.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mamma. I am going to ask the other commissioners
if they want to ask you any questions.

MS MKHIZE: We know very well that in most cases parents did not know
anything why some youth were gathering, more especially during those
times when they were activists. As far as we know ...

MS MKHIZE: Was he involved in any activities? Political activities? Was
he actually involved in any political activities? There is something
which I would like to get some clarity on. The time when you saw him at
the mortuary and you saw his eyes widely opened ...

MRS LUBISI: No, he was already dead, but his eyes were still opened.

MS MKHIZE: I thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Mr Malan?

MR MALAN: No questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Lewin?

MR LEWIN: Just one qusetion I would like to confirm, the date, it was
July 1990?

MRS LUBISI: Yes, it was July 1990.

MR LEWIN: And the ANC was not banned at that time, it had already been
unbanned. Is that the case?

MRS LUBISI: I don't get the question clear?

MR LEWIN: I just want to confirm that the march by the ANC youths was not
illegal by July 1990.

MRS LUBISI: It is obvious that they were not allowed at that time then.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, Mamma. Yours is a very

sad story and one of the unfortunate things that we have

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA

	5	LUBISI

heard in our work as the Commission is how many young people have been
killed in the time of violence in our country. The sacrifice that they
have made to ensure that we are where we are now has been a big one. We
thank you for sharing your story with us and we will try and investigate
to try and find out what actually happened. Thank you for coming. Thank
you, Mamma.



	------------

