	1	P MABALANE


	1	P MABALANE



	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: PULANE G MABALANE

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: I would like to say that there are people here today who have
come to make statements. If there are, please if you can go through that
entrance at any time during the day of over the next three days.
Statement takers are present and will be able to take your statements
today and over the next two days.

	Mrs Mabalane welcome, can you hear me? I know you have come a long way,
all the way from Vryburg and I would like to again extend a warm welcome
to you. You have come to tell us today about the very painful story that
you held with you for the last ten years. It is concerning your daughter.

	I understand that you have brought some witnesses with you. Are they
here this morning? Mrs Mabalane are the witnesses here with you - your
daughter?

MS MABALANE: Yes, she is here.

DR RANDERA: Would she like to come forward as well? I'm speaking about
Dipho Joyce Mabalane. Are you with us this morning? I also understand
that a statement has been made concerning your daughter by Neo Solomon
Kgetsana. Is he here this morning? Has he not come with you today?

	And then the last person who has also made a statement regarding your
daughter is Pulane Gladys Mabalane. Is she here MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST

	2	P MABALANE

this morning? Would she like to come forward?

	Mrs Mabalane, before I ask you to take the oath I just want to give some
background to the period we are talking about in the area that you are
coming from. What is now known as the North West Province incorporates
primarily the former homeland, called Bophuthatswana and significant
sections of the former Northern Cape. Bophuthatswana has rightly been
described as a jigsaw that doesn't fit, since it was made of seven
separate pieces of land spread across the north of Pretoria, Western
Transvaal, Northern Cape and the Orange Free State and reflects an ethnic
diversity which flew of the face of apartheid's bases for constructing
the homeland system. I just want to say that the area that you come from
particularly and your daughter there with you is Huhudi, and the time
that we area looking at is 1985. I would like to again put it in some
context.

	In 1983 14 Huhudi High School children were charged with public
violence. Priscilla Jana defended some of these children and charges were
withdrawn against some and other pleaded guilty and were given lashes. In
May 1983 a Councillor Mathloko claims that his house and shop were stoned
on occasions after Civic Association and UDF and Huhudi Youth Association
Meetings were held.

	In 1984 a small march in August demonstrating against the tricameral
elections was held. An ANC MK member allegedly killed himself with a hand
grenade and an attempt was made to set Councillor Dikgole's house alight.

	In 1985 and that is the year that we are going to be talking about soon,
a handgrenade was allegedly thrown by an unknown person at the house of
Councillor Dikgole, Chairperson on the Huhudi Community Council. There
were

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST

	3	P MABALANE

also attacks on the houses of Councillor Thiba and a Security Policemen.
On June 16 a commemoration service was held in the Huhudi Community Hall.
After the service, while the crowd was making its way home a Community
Councillor, Steven Mathloko, allegedly drives his bakkie into this crowd,
badly injuring a girl. Late that night Mathloko's shop is stoned.

	Between the 4th and the 11th of July Huhudi Civic Association holds a
meeting to discuss rents. The meeting was addressed by among others
Galeng, the Civic leader. The meeting resolves to write and present a
memorandum to Mr Dikgole. The evening of 11th July the house of Galeng
was stoned, allegedly by vigilantes. On the 12th of July a memorandum is
handed to Mr Dikgole. That evening the house of Francis London, another
Civic leader and Publicity Secretary of the Huhudi Civic Association is
burnt down.

	In mid July to November there were intense conflict in the Huhudi
community where almost daily reports of the stoning and burning of houses
belonging to Community Councillors, collaborators and policemen is
reported. Nicholas Ntusi, an activist from Huhudi is burnt to death by
vigilantes.

	Mrs Mabalane, that is the period that we are dealing with and you are
going to be talking about your daughter and I understand your other
daughter will also be talking about her sister.

	I would like you please now to stand up and take the oath. I would like
your daughter to stand up as well.

PULANE G MABALANE: (sworn states)

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mabalane I'm going to be leading you in telling your
story this morning. You have all the time and MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH
WEST

	4	P MABALANE

please take your time. Can you please start and tell us about your
daughter Frida Mabalane.

MS MABALANE: When she came back from school, just when she dropped her
books at home, then she left. During the day she came back being stabbed.
We kept her, we did not take her to the physician. At night we decided we
should.

DR RANDERA: We just want to improve the sound system. All right, can you
start again.

MS MABALANE: At night they came to fetch her. They took her next to the
stores. The kid came back. They have poured her with paraffin or petrol
gallon and she was burnt all over and then I took her and asked for
assistance from Mr Jungi. Mr Jungi said, my car was not ok, we'll ask
from brother Nel so that we can help you. Nel took us to the police
station. At the police station they took us to the hospital.

	When we arrived at the hospital they sent us to Kimberley. My daughter
died in Kimberley. When I left Kimberley I came back home. And then
someone who stabbed her

has never been arrested and also those people who burnt her, none of them
has been arrested as yet.

	When we arrived at this hospital, my mother's cousin who is Peggy
Beganju phoned my mom at Guateng. They came home and found that their
daughter was dead.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mabalane is there anything else you want to add or can I
go on to you daughter?

MS MABALANE: You can ask my daughter to testify.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mabalane are you all right?

S MABALANE: Yes.

DR RANDERA: I'm sorry that your daughter will not be able MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST

	5	P MABALANE

to give her part of the story. She has gone out to rest and perhaps if
she wants to come back, she can come back later.

	Mrs Mabalane I just want to ask you a few questions about Frida. Can you
tell us how old she was when she passed away?

MS MABALANE: She was 15 years.

DR RANDERA: And she was still going to school. What standard school was
she in?

MS MABALANE: She was in standard 5.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mabalane, can you tell us a little more about Frida. Was
she involved in the Youth Association? Was she involved in the UDF? Was
she a member of the ANC at the time?

MS MABALANE: She was a member of the UDF.

DR RANDERA: Do you like to, in your own words - and please take your time
- tell us why, you think, this happened to Frida.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mabalane, I'm sorry but I won't be allowed to take a
statement from your mother, because she has not made a statement to us,
but I welcome her to sit next to you and give you as much support and
comfort through this difficult period that you are going through right
now. Can I repeat my question Mrs Mabalane?

MS MABALANE: Yes you may.

DR RANDERA: Can you in your own words - and take your time - please tell
us why you think this horrific violation was committed against your
daughter?

MS MABALANE: May you repeat the question please?

DR RANDERA: Could you please in your own words tell us why you think that
this horrific violation was committed against your daughter? ....

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST

	6	P MABALANE

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mabalane I am going to stop at this moment and ask if my
fellow Commissioners and Committee members would like to ask some
questions.

MR MANTHATA: I would like to ask you about Zero Thebe. Have you ever
known what his real name was?

MS MABALANE: His name is Zero. His name is Zoro. Yes, it is written Zero.
I do not know his surname.

MR MANTHATA: So you don't know his surname? OK we will leave that
question out then.

The people who came to fetch Frida at home, were they youths or were they
adults?

MS MABALANE: They were youths.

MR MANTHATA: Do you know if they were school children or

just youths who were roaming the streets?

MS MABALANE: No, I do not know because they had their copper heads on.

MR MANTHATA: These young people do you know which organization they
belonged to as it was said there they were Civic Associations and other
organizations.

MS MABALANE: No, we never knew.

MR MANTHATA: Seemingly, there was an organization by the name of UDF. Did
those youths belong to the UDF?

MS MABALANE: Yes, they belonged to the UDF.

MR MANTHATA: I will return to the name, Zero Thebe. Was he also a member
of the UDF?

MS MABALANE: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: After this incidence I see here you said there was a family
friend, called Louis Manyedi.

MS MABALANE: Yes, he was my uncle.

MR MANTHATA: Did he continue to visit your family after this incidence?

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	7	P MABALANE

MS MABALANE: No, he never did, because he became ill thereafter and now
he has passed away.

MR MANTHATA: Was there a court case after the death? Did you know who was
handling the court case at the police station?

MS MABALANE: It was Sergeant Mogatsha.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you.

MS SEROKE: Mrs Mabalane I'm going to repeat what Dr Randera has asked
you. Have you any idea why they have killed Frida?

MS MABALANE: I think it was because my uncle was a

policeman. The two of my uncles were policemen. Now I think they killed
her because they thought she was related to two policemen.

MS SEROKE: So they have accused her of staying with policemen?

MS MABALANE: Yes, even if she went to the meetings she would be told that
she was a spy.

MS SEROKE: What do you request from the Truth Commission with regards to
this matter?

MS MABALANE: I would liked to be helped with my house.

MS SEROKE: Did they burn your house?

MS MABALANE: No. I'm staying with my Granny. I do not have a place to
stay and I would like to have a house of my own together with my children.

MS SEROKE: Mrs Mabalane we have listened to your horrific story. We don't
know if we will listen to the testimony from Dipho, but we want to thank
you that you came to the Commission to tell us the pain that you have
been through and the heavy burden that is still inside you. We will
request God to be with you in this time of trouble and would MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	8	P MABALANE

ask Him to console you. We don't have those powers, the Commission, but
we are going to try and see whether there is any way we can help you. We
want to thank you very much.

	--------------------



