	1	MABALANE


	1	MABALANE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23.07.1996	NAME:	PHILLIP MABALANE

CASE:		-		SOWETO

DAY 2

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: I will ask Mr Mabalane to come forward. Mr Mabalane. Mr
Mabalane, it has been a long day. We will ask you to stand. Sotho, can
you assist him to stand up so as to take an oath please. Everybody stands.

PHILLIP MABALANE: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: I will then ask Hugh Lewin to assist Mr Mabalane in giving
his testimony.

MR LEWIN: Mr Mabalane, thank you very much for being so patient with us.
Can you hear me alright, yes, and for sitting through. What you have to
tell us is something very personal and very, very bitter arising out of
the events of June 16 and your son. We would ask you please to feel
relaxed, to tell us in your own time the story of Matthews and what
happened to him after June 16 when he left the country and then when he
came back again. Thank you very much.

INTERPRETER: The speaker's mike is not on.

CHAIRPERSON: Please switch on the mike.

MR MABALANE: After the incident of the 1976 towards September, October
Matthews left the country, escaped. After that early in January that is
when we received the message from the police that he was detained in John
Vorster Square, but we never got to see him in person. We were not even
allowed to see him. We could only take his clothes.

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	2	P MABALANE

We were allowed to go to get his clothes.

	After the 16th of February 1977 two detectives, one black and the other
one was white, came to our place. They were coming to tell us that they
wanted to see me at John Vorster Square. It was just after receiving the
11 o' clock news that there was someone who was arrested at John Vorster
Square, someone who died who was thrown from the 11th floor of John
Vorster Square and died. I asked the policemen that have you come here to
tell me that my son is dead. The tried to explain and they said, no, we
just want to question you.

	I left with them to John Vorster Square. We went to the tenth floor
where they told me that my child was there and was interrogated and
jumped through the window and fell down from the tenth floor. I asked how
did he come through because he was in your hands. No, we just saw him,
suddenly we saw him going through the window. They told me the following
day I should come to receive about eight o' clock at John Vorster Square
where they took me to the other detective to identify the corpse of my
son at the Government mortuary. After that they told me that according to
the Law, Constitutional Law, I do not have the right to take any steps
regarding this matter, according to the Law. All I could do is for them
to release the corpse to me that I should bury it myself. Truly, I did
that, I buried my son. That is the end.

MR LEWIN: Mr Mabalane, thank you very much for telling that story. If I
could just ask a couple of questions to bring it out a bit longer.
Firstly, going to back to 1976, was your son active with the other
students in Soweto which was why he left the country?

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE

	3	P MABALANE

MR MABALANE: Yes, true. It is true. He was active.

MR LEWIN: And then he once he went into Botswana, did you have any
contact with him either then or later?

MR MABALANE: No, we never met and we never communicated when he was in
Botswana.

MR MABALANE: So could you tell us why you think he came back? In your
statement you mention he comes back through Zeerust and was then arrested
in Zeerust. Why do you think he came back the following year?

MR MABALANE: You know, all what I know now is that he had some connection.

INTERPRETER: I missed something. I am sorry.

MR LEWIN: Sorry, perhaps could you just repeat that last sentence. The
translator has missed it. Thank you.

INTERPRETER: The speaker's mike is not on.

MR MABALANE: I had some connection, I never had some connection until I
heard he was arrested, he was at the John Vorster Square.

MR LEWIN: When these detectives came to see you did they at any stage say
why he was being held or under what Act he was being held at John Vorster
Square?

MR MABALANE: They never said anything except they just told me that my
son was arrested because he was trying to escape from the country, from
Botswana coming to South Africa.

MR LEWIN: And then after he died and when they finally let you see him,
and I understand it took a full day for that to happen.

MR MABALANE: They only, they actually said to me I should go and identify
the corpse. That was the only time after he had died.

MR LEWIN: Okay, but there was never, after that, there was

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	4	P MABALANE

no inquest nor a post-mortem report and they gave you no chance to make
any, take any action?

MR MABALANE: No, there was no inquest whatsoever.

MR LEWIN: Could I ask, just to go back, before I pass onto other people
who might have other questions. How old was your son when he left in 1976?

MR MABALANE: I do not remember quite well. However, he is a 1954. When he
left for Botswana it was 1976. You can estimate yourself as to how old he
was at the time.

MR LEWIN: Yes, thank you very much. Then could you tell us where you
actually buried him?

MR MABALANE: Avalon Cemetery.

MR LEWIN: Mr Mabalane, thanks very much. We will try and follow this up
as far as possible. There must be records. We will try and find those
records and be in touch with you. I hand you back to the Chairperson.
Thanks very much.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you Sir. Piet Meiring.

PROF MEIRING: Mr Mabalane, I would like to ask about your other children.
Was Matthews your only child or are there other children too? Mr
Mabalane, I would like to ask was Matthews your only child or were there
other children too in the family?

MR MABALANE: He was my third son. I have six sons. He was actually the
third one and I am only left with five sons now.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. That is the only question I wanted to
ask.

CHAIRPERSON: Russell Ally.

DR ALLY: Mr Mabalane, how do you see the Truth Commission as being of any
assistance to you? You have come to tell your story, to testify. What is
it that you are actually

SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	5	P MABALANE

hoping the Truth Commission can do?

MR MABALANE: I do not have much that I could say. I just trust and hope
that what happened to my child, I do not really know how the Truth
Commission can help me, but I have given all and I have said everything
regarding my child, my son. So, and how his death came by.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes Ms Sooka. Maybe I can also just ask one question that
there might be things surrounding your son's death which remains a
question mark in your own mind. If you have any, can you share them with
us so that that can assist our investigators in assisting you to come to
terms with what happened to your family.

MR MABALANE: There is nothing that I am aware of when he was still alive
except after his death because they detained my other son for six months
and after that they released him. There is nothing that they actually got
from him.

CHAIRPERSON: I thank you. Hugh, Hugh Lewin. Joyce Seroke.

MS SEROKE: Mr Mabalane, you say they actually gave you the corpse to
bury. Did they actually give you the restrictions as to how the funeral
should be conducted or they just gave you and said nothing, you can bury
him in any way that you like to.

MR MABALANE: Yes, at that time they were not so strict. They never gave
restrictions as to how conduct funerals or maybe how many people shall
come or what. We just buried him normally.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Mabalane, we thank you for your testimony and also
congratulate you in the sense that you have had an opportunity of seeing
the dawn of what your son and many others died for. We hope the
reparations policy plan will be announced during your lifetime as well.
We thank you SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE



	6	P MABALANE

very much.

	------------------------------



























































SOWETO HEARING	GAUTENG PROVINCE

