
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	28.11.96 	NAME: MICHAEL MANDLA MABHENA

CASE: TEMBISA

__________________________________________________________

MR LEWIN: Mr Mabhena we would like to welcome you to the stand. Before
you tell your story please take the oath.

MICHAEL MANDLA MABHENA: (sworn states)

MR LEWIN: Thank you. Mr Mabhena you are here today to tell us the story
of your brother in fact, is that not so?

MR MABHENA: That's correct.

MR LEWIN: It relates to an incident in June 1993. Please feel relaxed, I
will lead you, we would like you please to tell us what happened on that
day in June 1993. Feel relaxed, tell us your story in your in your own
time. Thank you.

MR MABHENA: I was asleep at home. It was past 8 o'clock. Time went on
until at night. It was about past 3 o'clock in the morning. I then heard
the sound of a helicopter. I went outside to investigate and I saw police
cars and these were combis, they were green in colour.

	At about past 4 o'clock I heard shooting. After the shooting I didn't go
out to see as to what they were shooting. I slept at home and my mother
wasn't home at the time, I was alone and my brother was out at that night
in another section. They were working at that section.

MR LEWIN: Your brother's name?

MR MABHENA: Nxholisi. I went back to sleep. Early in the morning a woman
came to our house and she asked where my mother was. I asked her what was
the problem. She said there is no problem. I tried to persuade her to
tell me but TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	MABHENA

she said there was nothing. Later she told me that my brother has died.
After she left I went out following her and I found my brother. It was
somewhere in the forest, there was nobody around. I looked at him and he
was dead. I tried to turn him to see. I could see that all his bones were
broken. Then I went and looked for my mother.

	I told my mother and after I told her she couldn't speak. She just fell
down. I don't know whether she fainted. I can't continue with my story. I
can't.

MR LEWIN: Take your time.

MR MABHENA: At the night the same day when my brother was killed I saw
these cars which came to my place, they were white and they had smeared
some chemicals on their faces. MS MKHIZE: We know that when you try to go
back and remember everything it's painful. As you explained what has
happened to your mother. However, it might help you if you can try to be
strong and continue with your story.

MR MABHENA: After I have seen these people I suspected that those were
the people who might have killed my brother. They were not alone, they
were with some people from another section at Vusimuzi. It was an Inkatha
section.

MR LEWIN: Mr Mabhena would it help if I asked you some questions and then
you could just answer the questions, would that help?

MR MABHENA: That's correct, I can.

MR LEWIN: If you could perhaps tell us what your brother was involved in,
because you mentioned in your statement that he was part of a patrol, if
you could tell us about that patrol and what he was doing.

MR MABHENA: They were patrolling because at that time there was a fight
between us and the Vusimuzi Hostel

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	MABHENA

residents.

MR LEWIN: Was that at the time that the Xhosa-speaking people had been
pushed out of Vusimuzi?

MR MABHENA: Yes Sir.

MR LEWIN: And so your brother was patrolling with friends to try and sort
out the problems, is that right?

MR MABHENA: Yes Sir. He was involved also as a member of the ANC.

MR LEWIN: Okay. And have you discovered afterwards from what people have
told you what actually happened or what you think happened?

MR MABHENA: Where Sir?

MR LEWIN: Happened to your brother when he was shot that night, do you
have friends or people who witnessed the shooting?

MR MABHENA: There were people but they were also shot.

MR LEWIN: Were they also killed?

MR MABHENA: No they were not killed.

MR LEWIN: I mean has anyone explained to you why your brother was in the
state that you found him?

MR MABHENA: What do you mean Sir?

MR LEWIN: You mentioned that you found his body and that obviously all
the bones in his body were broken, has anyone explained that to you?

MR MABHENA: Yes there is someone who explained to me.

MR LEWIN: Can you tell us what that person said?

MR MABHENA: After 5 o'clock there are people who go to work in the
mornings. They were patrolling and they were trying to guide these people
as to what route to take. And they asked these people where were you
going and these people said you do not ask what we are doing, it's none of

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	MABHENA

your business. They found out that they were asking the killers this time.

MR LEWIN: But were those people identified in any way? Why do you think
they were from the hostel?

MR MABHENA: It is because after everything they disappeared into the
hostel.

MR LEWIN: They were seen going back into the hostel?

MR MABHENA: Yes Sir.

MR LEWIN: And were any reports made to the police? Did the police come
and investigate?

MR MABHENA: The police were told on the very same day but they never came
back.

MR LEWIN: And what did you do, you mentioned these forests, can you tell
us where the forests are and then what did you do with your brother's
body?

MR MABHENA: I just turned his body over. This forest is near Vusimuzi,
it's at the garage.

MR LEWIN: And what did you do about burying your brother's body?

MR MABHENA: He was the sole breadwinner. My mother was just keeping the
mother but he was the one who was supporting us.

MR LEWIN: And then can you tell us what has happened to the family since
then, since 1993, how do you survive? How is your mother? How are you?

MR MABHENA: We are just surviving but not so well like before because
there is no one working now.

MR LEWIN: What are you doing yourself Mr Mabhena?

MR MABHENA: I am a student.

MR LEWIN: What are you studying?

MR MABHENA: I am studying at Nxysivele.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	MABHENA

MR LEWIN: And none of your other brothers and sisters are able to work
and bring in money?

MR MABHENA: My other brothers and sisters are married now.

MR LEWIN: And do they help look after your mother?

MR MABHENA: I would not know that because we are just surviving as we
were surviving like before.

MS SEROKE: You say that they shot your brother and you said when you
turned him over you realised that all his bones were broken, how were
they broken? As you said he was shot, was there any post mortem to show
the cause of death?

MR MABHENA: He was shot, after he was shot they broke all his bones.

MS SEROKE: It means they were hacking him.

MR MABHENA: They were not hacking him but they were just breaking his
bones like using an object.

MS SEROKE: In your statement you said he was abducted, did they take him
from one place to another place?

MR MABHENA: Yes they took him to an open place.

MS SEROKE: These people who witnessed the incident are they still alive?

MR MABHENA: Yes they are still alive.

MS SEROKE: How old is your mother?

MR MABHENA: If I reckon she is 49.

MS SEROKE: You said she is not working?

MR MABHENA: That's correct.

MS SEROKE: How is her health?

MR MABHENA: It's not that good, just like myself.

MS SEROKE: Thank you.

MS MKHIZE: How many people were injured on that day?

MR MABHENA: There were three.

MS MKHIZE: Were they also killed?

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	MABHENA

MR MABHENA: No.

MS MKHIZE: Are they still alive, how did they survive?

MR MABHENA: I think my brother was in front and they were coming behind
him. When they see the people drawing their guns those who were behind
ran away.

MS MKHIZE: Did you ever consider going to counsellors or psychologists?

MR MABHENA: I didn't get such help.

MS MKHIZE: I think this might help if you can go and see psychologists
since people like you who have undergone such painful experiences they
get affected and even their health deteriorates, therefore I will suggest
that you see them in time before everything goes wrong. You also said
that you saw White men who have blackened their face with black ash, when
did you see them? After your brother was shot and you have seen his body
or before?

MR MABHENA: No it was before. It was a time when they entered the
township.

MS MKHIZE: Those people who were shot were they shot by these White men?

MR MABHENA: I would say they were together the White men and the Black
people because there were so many combis and the people were full inside.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you.

MR LEWIN: Mr Mabhena we would like to express our appreciation to you for
coming. The story that you tell is a very painful one and we can well
understand your reluctance or the pain that it brings and the suffering
that you are still experiencing. I think we would like to thank you for
coming. It is not an easy thing to do and what you have done this morning
is very brave. So we would like to

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	MABHENA

salute you for that.

	We will as Commissioner Hlengiwe Mkhize has suggested, we would suggest
that you look at the possibility or ask at the clinic the possibility of
getting counselling because what you are wrestling with yourself is
something that is very difficult, because you have suffered physical
pain. Your brother has died, but you are now suffering the psychological
pain of that. It is easy for us to say yes, your brother died in the
struggle but so many other people died and his life was part of that
struggle, it's very easy to say that and to recognise that, but then you
the family still stay behind and have to bear the pain and keep alive,
keep living. You also have the responsibility for your mother. So we
express our solidarity with you, urge you to have strength and to seek
assistance. We will investigate the case and come back to you. Thank you
very much for coming. That was a big step by you today. Thank you.

	--------------

