
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	24-09-1996		NAME: SAKHILE MACWASHE

CASE: DUNCAN VILLAGE

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:	We would now call Sakhile Macwashe and Griffiths Fivana and
Nomfundu Daisy Dodo.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like you to take an oath.
Sakhile, please stand up.

SAKHILE MACWASHE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Griffiths, please stand up.

GRIFFITHS FIVANA:	(sworn states)

REVD FINCA:	Thank you. Thank you, we welcome you and we'll give this
opportunity to Ms Maya who will ask you questions. Thank you.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Chairman. Sakhile, let me start with you. In August
1985, you were shot. You say you were playing with children of your age
group and you got shot by soldiers. How old were you at this time?

S MACWASHE:	I think I was 15 years old if I still remember very well.

MS MAYA:	What happened when the soldiers shot you?

S MACWASHE:	We were playing and the soldiers came and shot us. Our
mistake is that we ran away. My friends were running away and I told them
not to, but they ran away and they left me there alone.

	While I was there alone, I asked myself why am I not running and then I
ran and that was the mistake I did.

	I went to the next door house, my next door house and I am not sure
about the first bullet, but what I remember is DUNCAN VILLAGE
HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			S MACWASHE

that people were crying and they saw blood. They were saying blood, blood.

	And I fell down while I was trying to stand up, I could feel another
bullet passing through my stomach and I slept down there and these boers
came. They came next to me, they dug a hole and they wanted to put me in
that hole.

MS MAYA:	Who was digging this hole and where?

S MACWASHE:	It was in Msimango in 1986.

MS MAYA:	Who was digging the hole?

S MACWASHE:	Can you please repeat?

MS MAYA:	Who was digging the hole Sakhile?

S MACWASHE:	It was these boers.

MS MAYA:	Where in Msimango?

S MACWASHE:	Next to the four roomed houses.

MS MAYA:	Were there houses where they were digging this hole?

S MACWASHE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Who took you from the place you fell?

S MACWASHE:	These boers came and they took me because people were crying
and they took me with their car to hospital.

MS MAYA:	The soldiers took you to hospital?

S MACWASHE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	How much were you injured?

S MACWASHE:	In my legs and my shoulders. In my forehead.

MS MAYA:	Were these bullets taken out at the hospital?

S MACWASHE:	Yes, in my leg.

MS MAYA:	Do you still have any other bullets in your body?

S MACWASHE:	I'm not sure, I can't say for sure.

MS MAYA:	How long did you stay in the hospital?

S MACWASHE:	I stayed for a long time there.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			S MACWASHE

MS MAYA:	Can you please estimate how many weeks or months?

S MACWASHE:	It was months, but I'm not sure how many.

MS MAYA:	At this time you said you were 15 years old. Were you at school?

S MACWASHE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Which standard were you?

S MACWASHE:	I was in standard 3.

MS MAYA:	Did you go back to school after you were shot?

S MACWASHE:	Yes, I did.

MS MAYA:	Did you continue with your education?

S MACWASHE:	Yes, but I dropped out at standard 5.

MS MAYA:	When you were dropping out at school, does that have anything to
do (tape ends) Do you still feel that you have to see Doctors?

S MACWASHE:	Yes, my head is not right, but I'm not going to any Doctors.

MS MAYA:	What do you feel in your head?

S MACWASHE:	My head is not, my memory is not good.

MS MAYA:	But do you go to any Doctors?

S MACWASHE:	No, I don't go to any Doctor.

MS MAYA:	Do you have a reason for that, for not going to Doctors?

S MACWASHE:	No, there is no reason for that.

MS MAYA:	Do you need any help so that you can go back to a Doctor? Do you
want to be helped so that you can go back to the Doctor?

S MACWASHE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	After you were discharged from the hospital, what happened to
you?

S MACWASHE:	After I was discharged from the hospital, the soldiers left a
notice that the nurses should phone them.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			S MACWASHE

MS MAYA:	Where did this soldiers leave this message?	

S MACWASHE:	They left the message with the nurses.

MS MAYA:	Did the nurses phone the soldiers?

S MACWASHE:	No, they didn't phone them, but they just told me that that
was the day for me to go home.

MS MAYA:	When you arrived at home, what happened?

S MACWASHE:	When they told me that I have to go home, I went, I did
prepare myself and then I went home. When I was arriving at home, I slept
and the next day I went to visit a friend.

MS MAYA:	Can we continue Sakhile?

S MACWASHE:	Yes, please continue.

MS MAYA:	In your statement you said that while visiting your friend you
saw a hippo going to where you were staying. What happened after that?

S MACWASHE:	When - I was scared. I ran away and I ran into the house and
they told me that the hippo doesn't want me, it was just passing. It
stopped near my house.

	The soldiers wanted to see me and someone called me. I responded.

MS MAYA:	Who was calling you?

S MACWASHE:	The owner of the house called me. I went to the soldiers and
they asked who I was. Before I answered them, I asked them a question
"what was the problem?"

	While we were still arguing, I told them my name.

MS MAYA:	What did they do to you after you told them who you were?

S MACWASHE:	They said they are taking me with their hippo.

MS MAYA:	Did they tell you where they are taking you to? Did they tell
you why they want to go with you?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			S MACWASHE

S MACWASHE:	I said to them I'm not going with them, because I didn't know
where I was going.	They just said I must come with them and then I said
to them they must tell the owner of the house where they are taking me,
so that the owner can tell my father where I was, but they didn't do that.

	What they did, they tried to push me to the hippo and we struggled,
because I didn't want to go with them.

MS MAYA:	Did you go to the hippo with them?

S MACWASHE:	Yes, I did because they all struggled with me, taking me with
them to the hippo. They drove around the township and then they went with
me to the C-Section, but unfortunately they were looking for a certain
number, but they asked a man who just arrived at this Section.

	They also took that man and they assaulted him. While they were doing
that to that man, they wanted him to say that he is an informer to tell
people that he is an informer, because at that time, if you were found to
be an informer people were burning you.

MS MAYA:	What happened after that?

S MACWASHE:	After that they said that they - that man must go out, but he
couldn't because the door was high and they kicked him out while the
hippo was still moving.

MS MAYA:	Do you know what happened to that man?

S MACWASHE:	No.

MS MAYA:	Do you know who the man was?

S MACWASHE:	No, I don't. It was the first time I met him.

MS MAYA:	What happened to you after they drove around the township, where
did they take you to?

S MACWASHE:	They took me to Fleet Street police station

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			S MACWASHE

and they took my finger prints and then I told them that I didn't do
anything, why should they take my finger prints. That is where they
started kicking me, they forced me, they forced to take my finger prints
and they were assaulting me at that time.

MS MAYA:		Do you remember any soldiers or policemen who were there?

S MACWASHE:	No, I don't remember any.

MS MAYA:	What happened in Fleet Street, how long did you stay there?

S MACWASHE:	They took me to Westbank the next day. In Fleet Street they
gave me a porridge and I didn't know what was within that porridge, it
looked dirty.

MS MAYA:	 Let us continue Sakhile. In your statement you said that you
were not charged, but you just stayed in prison for 9 months, is that so?

S MACWASHE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	What happened to you?

S MACWASHE:	They released me because they said I was not charged. They
didn't find me guilty. I went once in court and they didn't find me
guilty.

MS MAYA:	Did you have any lawyer?

S MACWASHE:	I don't remember.

MS MAYA:	Do you have a request to ask from this Commission, except the
request that you want to be helped to go back to the Doctors, do you have
any other request?

S MACWASHE:	Yes, I do.

MS MAYA:	What is your request?

S MACWASHE:	My request is that I want the Commission to do anything for
me what it can - it can do anything for me.

MS MAYA:	I'll give this opportunity to the Chairperson.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			S MACWASHE

REVD FINCA:	Revd Xundu?

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman. Do you get any pension?

S MACWASHE:	No, I don't.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you apply for it?

S MACWASHE:	No.

REVD XUNDU:	Are you employed?

S MACWASHE:	No, I'm unemployed.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you have a wife and children?

S MACWASHE:	No, I don't.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Macwashe. We will now call on Mr Fivana.

MS MAYA:	Mr Fivana, can you hear me?

G FIVANA:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	In August 1985, you said you were shot here in Duncan Village by
the soldiers of the South African Defence Force. You said you were
amongst the people who were toyi-toying. What really happened?

G FIVANA:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Please come nearer to the mike so that we can hear you.

G FIVANA:	Yes, I was one of the people who were toyi-toying.

MS MAYA:	Do you remember what was happening at that day?

G FIVANA:	Yes, at that time, it was a very difficult time. We were
toyi-toying and the soldiers were shooting us.

MS MAYA:	Were you a member of any political organisation or were you
active in politics?

G FIVANA:	Can you please repeat your question?

MS MAYA:	Were you a member of a political organisation around the
township or did you play any part in politics at

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8			G FIVANA

that time?

G FIVANA:	I was not a member, but I was under ANC.

MS MAYA:	What happened when you were shot?

G FIVANA:	We were toyi-toying on that day.

MS MAYA:	Where were you? Where were you exactly?

G FIVANA:	We were here in Dunga.

MS MAYA:	Do you still remember the date here in August?

G FIVANA:	No, I don't. I just remember the day.

MS MAYA:	Which day was it?

G FIVANA:	It was on Tuesday.

MS MAYA:	Was it this Tuesday of the first week when this unrest started
here in Duncan Village?

G FIVANA:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Where did the soldiers shoot you?

G FIVANA:	They shot me all over my body - my legs, my hands.

MS MAYA:	Did you go to hospital?

G FIVANA:	No, I didn't, because at that time when you went to hospital,
the soldiers were taking you to prison so that's why I didn't go to
hospital. Just went to the clinic here in Dugashe.

MS MAYA:	When did you go to the clinic, was it the same day? When did you
go to the clinic?

G FIVANA:	I went to the clinic on the next day, the day after I got shot.

MS MAYA:	Did you sat with these bullets in your body?

G FIVANA:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	And then what happened?

G FIVANA:	I went to the clinic and they gave me medicine to apply to the
places where I was shot. They just said the bullets will just come out,
that didn't happen.

	I stayed and I could feel the pellets in my body, my

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9			G FIVANA

body was in pain and then in September I went to Transkei where I was
admitted at Tafalofefe hospital, they removed the three pellets in my
body. And other bullets, I just removed them myself with a blade.

MS MAYA:	What happened in Tafalofefe in Transkei? Do you have any
relatives there?

G FIVANA:	No, there is no one I know in that place but because I was
afraid of going to prison, I went to Transkei..

MS MAYA:	Mr Fivana, at the time you were shot, were you employed?

G FIVANA:	No, but I just used to get one day jobs.

MS MAYA:	After you were shot, did your life go back to the normal way?

G FIVANA:	No, I didn't feel, I'm still not feeling all right at this
present moment.

MS MAYA:	Are you employed now?

G FIVANA:	No.

MS MAYA:	Do you have a family - wife and children?

G FIVANA:	Yes, I do have a wife and a child.

MS MAYA:	Did you make any claim or did you get any money?

G FIVANA:	No, I didn't claim.

MS MAYA:	Did you get any other help or help from the Government?

G FIVANA:	No.

MS MAYA:	What supports you with your family?

G FIVANA:	I just live with the one day jobs to support my family.

MS MAYA:	Do you have any other thing you want to raise in front of this
Commission?	

G FIVANA:	The request I would like to make to this

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	10			G FIVANA

Commission, I want the Commission to help me since I'm unemployed.

MS MAYA:	In what way?

G FIVANA:	Firstly I'm suffering and I can't even support myself. I can't
buy clothes for myself because I'm unemployed and I can't even support my
child.

MS MAYA:	How old is your child?

G FIVANA:	My child is 9 months old.

MS MAYA:	Do you have any other request?

G FIVANA:	I would like the Commission to help me.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Fivana, I'll give this opportunity to the Chairman
- maybe he's got questions to ask you. Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Now, June Crichton.

MS CRICHTON:	Can you hear me Mr Fivana? Can you hear me?

I just have one more question, that is whereabouts exactly were you when
you were shot? You say you were toyi-toying, but in what area, what part
of Duncan Village?

G FIVANA:	I was shot here in Dunga Street.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Ntsikelelo Sandi?

MR SANDI:	Mr Fivana, on this day you were toyi-toying in the street, what
time was it?

G FIVANA:	It was early in the morning.

MR SANDI:	How did you know that there was going to be a toyi-toyi? Did
you just see people toyi-toying or were you called by someone?

G FIVANA:	Everybody was toyi-toying at that time.

MR SANDI:	Were there any other people who were injured at that time?

G FIVANA:	Yes, there were many other people who were

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	11			G FIVANA

injured.

MR SANDI:	Do you know any people you know who was shot at that time?

G FIVANA:	No, I don't know these people. There is no one I can say I know.

MR SANDI:	In Pefferville Clinic - on the day you went there, what
happened in the clinic?

G FIVANA:	 We went there to the clinic, I was not the only one. There
were also others who went with me.

	The nurse who was there was on duty, treated us. He just applied a red
ointment to our wounds.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Fivana. Thank you Mr Chairman.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Fivana and Mr Macwashe who had to leave. I
think, your testimony or your evidence would help us to clarify what
happened on the day people were shot and people were injured, others were
killed in the massacre which continued for three days.

	Thank you for your evidence which you brought forward because your
evidence is important and it gives clarity to what happened at that time.

	Your requests which you brought forward to this Commission, we will look
at them and we will forward them to the President who is going to see
what he can do.

	Thank you very much and we also thank Mr Sakhile Macwashe, wherever he
is now. Thank you, you can now go back to your place.

	--------------------

