
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23-07-1996	NAME: PATRICK MADOLO

CASE: QUEENSTOWN

DAY 2



PATRICK MADOLO:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you very much. I was just a bit worried that these
times had changed women to men.

REVD FINCA:	I have found that Ester Madolo is unable to come and testify
personally before the Commission, and she has asked that you testify on
her behalf. Is that right?

P MADOLO:	Yes, that is correct.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you very much sir. We would like to welcome you and we
would like to give over to Ntsikelelo Sandi and let him lead you in your
evidence on behalf of the Commission.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairman. You said that your name was Patrick
Madolo?

P MADOLO:	That's right.

MR SANDI:	You came to give evidence on behalf of Esther Madolo?

P MADOLO:	I came on behalf of my parents, because they couldn't come
because of this.

MR SANDI:	You are going to testify about what happened on the 28th of
October 1989. What happened to Pasika Madolo?

P MADOLO:	That's correct.

MR SANDI:	What was Pasika Madolo to you?

P MADOLO:	He was my brother.

MR SANDI:	Can you please tell us what you know to have happened to your
brother on this day?

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			P MADOLO

P MADOLO:	Yes, I can tell you.

MR SANDI:	Please tell us, Patrick.

P MADOLO:	This whole thing happened as a result of the unrest that
started at school and when this happened, my brother was away at school.
He was at school in Lady Frere. He had come back the Friday to come and
get groceries and he came at the time when the police were shooting in
our street.

	And it was something that had started back at the school. I had gone to
work after six on that day and had left them in the yard at home.

	Apparently there was a meeting at school on that day. The meeting had
come out already, because he had come by bus after five.

MR SANDI:	Do you know if the meeting - what the meeting was all about?

P MADOLO:	The meeting was about - for the parents and the children.

MR SANDI:	What were they going to talk about at this meeting?

P MADOLO:	They were going to talk about the cause of this unrest at the
school because apparently some people were taking the law into their own
hands. And the cause of this unrest was that one of the ladies on the
Board had - there was conflict between her child who was a student there
and in this conflict her child was beaten and she went onto the premises
and hit the child that had assaulted her child.

	So on that Friday there was a meeting for the parents who were
complaining about Board members who were taking the law into their own
hands.

MR SANDI:	Were they not going to discuss a student that had

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			P MADOLO

been shot by the police at this meeting?

P MADOLO:	There was a student that had been shot at that time.

MR SANDI:	Who was he?

P MADOLO:	I cannot remember if it Mulelo Beger.

MR SANDI:		Where was Pasika shot? Where exactly at Indwe was Pasika shot?

P MADOLO:	He was shot in the location.

MR SANDI:	Would you be able to elaborate on the manner in which he was
shot and by whom he was shot?

P MADOLO:	According to information we received, since the police had shot
that Friday night and did not want anybody walking around the streets, he
had left home and walked halfway with a friend of his from school and the
following day, at approximately past six when I came back from work, when
I was going to undress and get ready for bed, I heard a scream from the
kitchen side.

	When I jumped to see what was happening, another cousin of mine was
explaining that she thought it was Pasika who had been shot and had been
locked up in another house.

	I hurriedly, while my father was still going to get dressed, I ran to
this house. This was Maqonge's house. When I got to this house, there was
room in which the boys stayed and it was closed up.

	When I opened it, he was laying there and he was finished.

MR SANDI:	Whose house was this in which he was shot?

P MADOLO:	This was Maqonge's house.

REVD FINCA:	Can we please keep quiet, this is the last witness. We had
shown respect to all the other witnesses. Can we please do the same with
this one?

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			P MADOLO

P MADOLO:	And one man came there, this is the man that had seen him. When
I asked what had happened here, he said that he had also been looking out
for his children and he just found Pasika's corpse laying on the ground.

	When I opened him up to see where the damage was, I did not see any
wounds in front and when I looked at his back, there was probably some
sort of punishment that they had inflicted upon him and there was a wound
which was sustained on his left and that is what I saw.

	And this man then continued to explain that now this child, according to
what he had heard, this is something that happened the previous day at
about six o'clock. It became apparent that after he had been shot, he ran
to a nearby house and that lady there, was not fair because she - when
she saw that his strength was fading, she chased him away and said go,
go, go. I don't want the police to come into my house.

	So it became apparent that there were people that dragged him when they
saw that his strength was fading and put him into this house and this is
where we found him dead.

MR SANDI;	If I understand you correctly, you are saying that Pasika and
them were being chased by the police?

P MADOLO:	I am trying to say that a group was being chased, because I am
not too clear on what happened with him, but they say that he went into
this house and that the gang that was being chased by the police, found
him along the way.

	Apparently he was weak already and they dragged him into this house,
into this room and this is where we found him, dead.

MR SANDI:	Is there anyone that, is there perhaps an eyewitness to all
this without saying that what you are

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			P MADOLO

saying is not true.

P MADOLO:	There are people but it is difficult for them to come forward
and say exactly what happened.

MR SANDI:	Pasika was then buried at home. Were there any conditions laid
down by the police in connection with how the funeral should be conducted?

P MADOLO:	No, there were no restrictions.

MR SANDI:	Were there any incidents on the day of the burial?

P MADOLO:	No, they co-operated with us, because they closed the road so
that the funeral procession could continue unhindered.

MR SANDI:	Was there any case that followed his murder?

P MADOLO:	No, we waited for something to happen after the post-mortem,
but nothing happened.

MR SANDI:	The attorney that your family went to, did you say, who did you
say it was again?

P MADOLO:	I cannot get his name precisely.

MR SANDI:	Was it not Mr Roshen Dehal?

P MADOLO:	I am not sure, but there were steps that were taken. I wasn't
at home that much during that time.

MR SANDI:	Your mom says in her statement that nothing became of the case.
Did the attorney give you any reason for this?

P MADOLO:	I cannot remember.

MR SANDI:	Is that all you have to say? Is that your testimony?

P MADOLO:	Yes, that is all.

MR SANDI:	Did your mom or are you - what do you want the Commission, or
what does your Mother want the Commission to do for you?

P MADOLO:	When we discussed this, we found that an investigation can be
conducted even though the investigation QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN
CAPE



	6			P MADOLO

will not bring him back to life.

	Because when he died, he was in standard 9, so this will not bring him
back for us to see him again. That is one of the reasons why my parents
just gave up and didn't, couldn't come here.

MR SANDI:	Is that all you want to say?

P MADOLO:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Can I hand you back to the Chairman?

P MADOLO:	Yes, you may.

MR SANDI:	Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

REVD FINCA:	 I am now going to ask - can we please keep quiet. Thank you
very much. I am going to ask Revd Xundu.

REVD XUNDU:	Was your mother's health affected by this?

P MADOLO:	My mom got very sick, so much so that she suffers from her
heart, a heart complaint and my father was still working when he also got
sick and he had to stop working because he is a diabetic and he has high
blood pressure.

REVD XUNDU:	How do they survive. Do they receive any pensions?

P MADOLO:	Yes, they do receive pensions.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you very much.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Patrick for being a man and coming to represent
your family in this situation and bringing your home closer to the
Commission.

	I am sure that your family can see that in you there is a man, there is
hope. We have heard what you have said to the Commission and we will
investigate and we have taken cognisance of the request from your family
and we thank you for having had the courage to come up to us.

	We have now reached the end of today's hearings. Tomorrow we will ask
that we start at nine o'clock because

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7

we will try to go home after the hearings.

	We would like to leave while it is still early and we are going to ask
people here that tomorrow's cases will be mainly from Queenstown, so I
will ask the people to come early, so we can start at exactly nine
o'clock.

	Thank you very much.	

	--------------------

