TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 03.05.96			NAME: MARTHA YEBONA MAHLANGU

CASE: GO\0182 - JOHANNESBURG

DAY 4

__________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: We are very glad to have amongst us the Chief Executive
Officer of the Commission, Dr Biki Minyuku.

DR BORAINE: Mrs Mahlangu, just before I welcome you, Dr Randera wishes to
make a statement.

DR RANDERA: Excuse me Mrs Mahlangu, I understand that there are members
of the public who want to make statements to the Truth Commission, could
we please ask them if they want to listen to the testimonies today they
are most welcome to do so, but if you want make your statements you can
go to our offices in the SANLAM centre around the corner on the 10th
floor. Thank you.

DR BORAINE: Mrs Mahlangu, I want to welcome you very warmly to the
witness stand. We are very grateful to you for coming, we know that it's
not easy, in fact it's very costly. May I ask you first, you have brought
somebody with you, perhaps you could tell us who that is?

MRS MHLANGU: This is my grandchild.

DR BORAINE: I understand that your grandson is with you and we would like
to welcome him very much as well.

MRS MHLANGU: Thank you.

DR BORAINE: Mrs Mahlangu I would be grateful if you would stand for the
taking of the oath.

MARTHA YEBONA MAHLANGU: (sworn states)

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much indeed, please be seated. Mrs Mahlangu,
in order to assist you, as you unfold a very grim and horrifying story
about your son Solomon, I'm going to ask Mrs Joyce Seroke, if she will
lead you, thank you.

MS SEROKE: Good morning Mama Martha, thank you that you took this
opportunity to come here. Before I ask you questions, I will give some
explanations, the background information in English showing what was
happening during that time when this happened to your child, what the
situation was then. I will just say briefly something indicating the
situation during Solomon Mahlangu's time.

	Solomon Mahlangu, a 20-year old standard nine pupil fled South Africa in
February 1976. He returned in June 1977 with a friend Monti Motloung and
armed with Russian- made weapons and a handgrenade, killed Mr Rupert
Kessner and Mr Kenneth Wolfendale in John Orr's Gogh Street warehouse. On
Friday 6th of April 1979 Solomon Mahlangu was executed for his part in
these killings. In tribute to Solomon the ANC later named the school set
up to educate students who had fled South Africa before completing their
education, the Solomon Mahlangu School.

	Solomon and Monty were apprehended and charged under the Sabotage Act.
Evidence led in court stated that the two young men had trained in Angola
as guerillas before slipping back into the country. Motloung was declared
unfit to stand trial while Mahlangu was sentenced to death in the Rand
Supreme Court. The charge of sabotage carried a minimum sentence of five
years but the death sentence imposed on Solomon Mahlangu caused an
international outcry. The court found that it was actually Monty Motloung
who had fired the shots but that he was suffering from a mental
disturbance allegedly related to the shooting and was thus unfit to stand
trial. The Judge found, however, that Mr Mahlangu had shared a common
purpose with Mr Motloung to use their firearms should the circumstances
arise. Leave to appeal was refused, an application for trial on the
grounds that people who were convicted in other trials should have given
evidence, was also refused.

	The use of capital punishment also escalated dramatically after 1974.
Solomon was one of 145 people sentenced to death during 1978 and among
133 people executed during 1979.

	Now Mama Martha, briefly could you tell us about your son Solomon?

MRS MHLANGU: What I could say, are you talking about before he left?

MS SEROKE: Just tell us about his life as he was growing up.

MRS MHLANGU: He just grew up like any other child. We just brought him up
and we could see what kind of a child we were bringing up, but he just
grew up as an ordinary child and he was listening to us. We really didn't
have any problem with him and he really wanted to further his studies and
he wanted to do woodwork and he also said he was going to teach. I really
didn't see anything different about him during the time when he was at
home.

MS SEROKE: When did you start to realise that he was involved in politics?

MRS MHLANGU: I really didn't see anything, I saw nothing until he left
home he wasn't doing anything that gave me any indication, he wasn't
doing anything.

MS SEROKE: When he left South Africa, did he tell you that he was leaving
and where he was going to?

MRS MHLANGU: No he didn't tell me anything, as a matter of fact I wasn't
at home, I had gone to work and when I came back he wasn't at home and I
thought maybe he had gone to sell some things, because he used to go and
sell some things to make some pocket money. When I didn't see him return
the following day I thought he had gone a long distance in a train sell
things on the way and in Pietersburg. They used to do that sort of thing
and on Monday he still was not back home when I came back and I didn't
know who to tell this to.

MS SEROKE: As many days passed, what did you say, was there a place where
you would went to start looking and finding out?

MRS MHLANGU: Before many days expired there was the father of Temba Nkosi
who came to tell me this, that Temba and Solomon had left, please stop
looking for him, we won't be able to find him. That was the father of
Temba Nkosi, I don't know how he heard because he was a policeman at
Gezina.

MS SEROKE: Once he had left, did he write any letters to you or did he
send you any messages, so that you could see that he was still alive
somewhere?

MRS MHLANGU: No he never wrote any letter to me. They said he only wrote
to his friend but he didn't write to me and they said I must write a
letter to him because he was in Maputo and ask him to come back home. He
wrote to his friend but not to me.

MS SEROKE: Here in your statement you said you heard from the radio when
they were reporting that there were terrorists that had killed white
people. And how did you find out that one of them was your son?

MRS MHLANGU: It was a month before we could really find out that it was
him. The only time we got to know was when the police came home to search
our home.

MS SEROKE: When the police came to search, what did they say they were
searching for?

MRS MHLANGU: Well they started searching before they told us anything and
they didn't say anything to us and didn't tell us what they were looking
for. After a while they started looking for his clothes and then I asked
them if they had found this person whose clothes they were looking for?
They said yes they had found him on the mountains of Middelburg. When I
asked if I could go and see him they said no they would inform me when I
could come and see him.

	They only came back to me after a month. On the next month he wrote to
me and told me that he was at John Vorster. I went there and was told
that their superior wasn't there and that I must come back the following
week. The following week I went back and I found him. They said I could
talk to him for a while but I mustn't talk to him about the case. We just
sat there, we didn't know what to talk about because we couldn't talk
about the case and we just looked at each other and I left him there.

	We just found out how life was and that's the only thing I asked about,
but were not allowed to talk about his case and where he'd been.

MS SEROKE: Once his case hearing started you heard here that they charged
him with sabotage and that he was arrested under the Sabotage Act? Did
you attend his court hearing?

MRS MHLANGU: Yes we just used to go and see him. When his court hearing
started we used to get Kempton Park hearings every day. That's how I lost
my job because I was attending his court hearing.

MS SEROKE: Once they sentenced him, how did you feel when they said to
him he was going to be hanged and that he was going to be killed? And it
was also said that he was arrested with his partner, but how did you feel
when he was the one who ended up being sentenced to death?

MRS MHLANGU: That was very painful, as a parent you know how the heart
feels, when you hear that word. We know we are all going to die but we
don't know how it will happen, but if you are told that your child is
going to be killed it is very very painful as a parent.

MS SEROKE: This charge that was given to him, he was supposed to be
sentenced only to five years but the outcome of his case was that he was
going to be hanged and they also said that the one who was with him, the
one who shot didn't get sentenced because it was said he was mentally
disturbed. How did you feel about this issue?

MRS MHLANGU: It was really painful to me as a parent. I didn't know who
to share this with and what I could do to save my child. I really didn't
have anything to save my child with.

MS SEROKE: As you are here Mama, you have given a statement to this
Commission. What would you like the Commission to do for you?

MRS MHLANGU: I cannot control the Commission, the Commission in its own
discretion can decide what it can do for me, I really cannot control the
Commission. I really can't say what the Commission must do for me.

MS SEROKE: Thank you Mama, I will pass on to our Father here.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, are there people that would like to ask some
questions?

MR MANTHATA: Mama I greet you. You said that Solomon was arrested with
someone else, who was this person?

MRS MHLANGU: Motloung.

MR MANTHATA: From that day were you able to meet Motloung?

MRS MHLANGU: No I haven't seen him, I only saw this child in prison but I
didn't see his mother.

MR MANTHATA: The child with you here is that child Solomon's.

MRS MHLANGU: No this is not his child, it is his sister's.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you.

DR RANDERA: Mama I can see that this is very painful for you so I won't
keep you long. I first of all just want to ask you, how many children do
you have?

MRS MHLANGU: My remaining children are four, they are all married. I'm
only with my one other son and we are not working.

DR RANDERA: My last question is that you must have been one of the last
people to see Solomon before he was hanged. Did he share anything with
you before this period?

MRS MHLANGU: When I went to see him, it was on a Thursday, on Friday I
was going to Jo'burg. They said I would go with Bishop to go and make an
appeal in Cape Town to the superiors who were handling the case, but then
I couldn't go

only Bishop went there, and he said to me,

"Mama, thank you for having been strong to come and visit me and not cry.
But where my blood will drop so many Solomons will grow up because I am
innocent".

DR ALLY: What did it mean to you when the ANC actually named their school
after Solomon?

MRS MHLANGU: The P A people, are you talking about that? Those are the
ones who were in the school after Solomon, they took me there in another
school. I just heard from hearsay that there was such a school that was
outside. When I wanted to go there there was nobody to accompany me. They
said to me that they will come and fetch me but they didn't.

DR ALLY: Do you think that if the Commission were to make those kinds of
recommendations that in memory of people who died that schools should be
named after them or monuments or parks, does that help in any way, does
that make a difference?

MRS MHLANGU: I don't know how that can help me but at least it will be
their memory, they will never be forgotten, we'll always remember what
they have done.

CHAIRPERSON: Mama, thank you so much for having sacrificed yourself and
sacrificing your son as well. We pray that God may console you and
console other people, thank you very much.

	-------------------------





