	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION



	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		23.09.1996		NAME: MAJOVA GARDINER

								 DOROTHY GARDINER

CASE NUMBER: 0119 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 1

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: I see you have somebody accompanying you today. Could you
please introduce the lady to us.

MR GARDINER: Pardon?

CHAIRPERSON: Could you introduce the lady who is sitting with you.

MR GARDINER: I am with my wife this morning.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Majova, could you just repeat that for us, please.

MR GARDINER: It is Dorothy Majova.

CHAIRPERSON: I'm soryr, Mr Majova, we didn't hear what you said. Can you
tell us who is the lady with you.

MR GARDINER: It is my wife, Dorothy.

CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you too. Thank you.

MR GARDINER: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Majova, you are going to be telling us about your son,
Mzwandile Watson Majova. Commissioner Yasmin Sooka who is sitting at the
table over there, will be helping you in telling your story, but before I
hand over to her, could you please stand and take the oath.

GARINER MAJOVA: (Duly sworn, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mr Majova, you may be seated.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	MR MAJOVA

Commissioner Sooka

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Mr Majova, tell me your story, you
have come to share your story with us about your son. Tell us a little
bit about yourself and about your son and then tell us what actually
happened to him.

MR MAJOVA: We were out at Brandfontein province, where we were working as
teachers. We left Brandfontein and we came over here to Stilfontein. We
were actually transferred by the department. We sent our child to Cape
Town to do the junior certificate together with the senior. That was in
1972.

	During the holidays he used to come back home. But at the end of 1975 he
did not report back home. We phoned over to Hewton University. The
headmaster at Hewton told us that they are not there, that they have left
college earlier after the winter holidays. After the winter holidays.
That was in November when we are making the enquiries. The headmaster
told us that they are not at school, they left school earlier of that
holidays. From reliable sources they had crossed the border into
Botswana. 	Well, we tried to find out from all other directions, we
couldn't find anything.

	We started getting police coming to our place. They wanted to know where
was our son. We told them that we don't know, he is missing as from
college. But they told us that we have got to know where the boy is.

	But after a long time, not knowing where the boy is, being harassed by
the police. In church they would take us out to the house to come and
search the house. But they found nothing.

	It was only in 1985, I think when we were told that our KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	MR MAJOVA

son is somewhere out in Tanganyika. We tried to find out how can we get
this boy back, but we could not find ways of getting in.

	In 1991 there was a call from somewhere that we must get to Krugersdorp,
a place called Kagiso and look there is a library. In front of the
library there is a plaque there and the name of my boy is there. We went
there with my wife and we saw the plaque with the names. The name of my
son was also there.

	Not knowing who wrote the names there, and who put the plaque there, and
after reading what was written there, we went to the police. Because they
are not very far from the library. They referred us to Rustenberg to a
place called Thabani. When we reached Thabani, at the police station, we
wanted to find out about the boys.

	They took their books and went through the books. They found one book
with their names in. It was written in inquest 13/1985. It was
1985.12.28. The names there were four. My boy's name was also there. We
wanted to find out where they were buried. They told us that it was
SAFFAS was responsible for that. We went there. They only said they had
buried them. We did not get the place where they were buried. Up to today
we have not had anybody telling us where the graves are.

	We will be very grateful if you could get that grave.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Mr Majova.

MR MAJOVA: To give them their rights to bury him correctly. I am asking
the Truth Commission with an idea of getting some help to get the grave
of our child. We want to give him the correct rights of burial. They told
us that it was a pauper's funeral that they gave him.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	MR MAJOVA

MS SOOKA: Tatta, thank you. Let me ask you a few questions, just to make
sure that I have got all the details of your story properly.

	You have said right at the beginning that both you and your wife were
teachers. Is that correct?

MR MAJOVA: Yes, it is true.

MS SOOKA: You were transferred to Stilfontein by the department.

MR MAJOVA: Yes, it is the truth.

MS SOOKA: How old was your son, Mzwandile when he disappeared?

MR MAJOVA: He was born in 1958 and he disappeared in 1985. I am not sure
...

MS SOOKA: You also say that you learnt from reliable sources that a group
of boys had crossed the border into Botswana. Did the headmaster tell you
that, who was this reliable source?

MR MAJOVA: The headmaster only said that he heard from reliable sources,
but they have gone over the boundary.

MS SOOKA: You mention that after that the police started harassing you.
Could you tell us what the form of harassment was.

MR MAJOVA: I remember one time they took me out of the church. We went
into the house. They took me from there into prison. I slept there. They
choked me that I must tell them the truth. I was so embarrassed, thinking
what are the children going to say about me, being their teacher, say
their teacher has been closed in a prison.

MS SOOKA: How long were you kept in the prison?

MR MAJOVA: The whole day. I slept there from - they put me in about 12
o'clock. I was released the following day at

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	MR MAJOVA

four o'clock.

MS SOOKA: Could you tell us what the name of - was it a police station or
a prison?

MR MAJOVA: Which place, the prison?

MS SOOKA: When they took you where they choked you, did they take you to
a police station or did they take you to a prison?

MR MAJOVA: Yes, they took me to the police station. Some water was poured
over my body and some instruments were put onto my body.

MS SOOKA: Did they shock you with electric shocks?

MR MAJOVA: Yes, they choked me.

MS SOOKA: Did this happen continuously?

MR MAJOVA: No, they just did that that time, for about 30 minutes and
they stopped it.

MS SOOKA: What happened after that?

MR MAJOVA: Later on in the day they took me back in their car.

MS SOOKA: What were they - during all of this, what questions were they
asking you? Were they asking you about your son?

MR MAJOVA: They said where is my child, I know where he is. MS SOOKA:
During the time that your son was away, did you ever hear from him?

MR MAJOVA: No, he never wrote.

MS SOOKA: So the first time you heard from him was in - you say that you
heard that he was in Tanganyika? That was in 1985?

MR MAJOVA: Yes, we heard that he was somewhere in Tanganyika.

MS SOOKA: Where did you hear that from?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	MR MAJOVA



MR MAJOVA: From certain boys out at Soweto.

MS SOOKA: Were you searching for him all this time?

MR MAJOVA: I was trying to find out where could I really get him.

MS SOOKA: I just want to check one thing with you. You say that you got a
call in 1991 that you must go to Krugersdorp, but in your statement you
say 1994. So I just want to check which is the correct date. Was it 1991
or 1994?

MR MAJOVA: 1994, I think when we went to Krugersdorp ... I have got it in
the statement, perhaps I might be making a mistake with the dates.

MS SOOKA: In your statement it is ... (intervention).

MR MAJOVA: But I remember at Krugersdorp, when we were reading that
plaque, that was opened by OR Thambo.

MS SOOKA: Do you want to tell us how many names there were on that plaque?

MR MAJOVA: But there were not more than ten.

MS SOOKA: And what did it actually say on the plaque?

MR MAJOVA: Their anniversary, the wedding and - Anniversary Monument in
honour of the following heroes: Watson Majova, unveiled by Comrade OR
Thambo, 15 December 1991, yes, that was the date. There were many, but I
only wrote my son's.

MS SOOKA: Tatta, who had asked you to come to Krugersdorp? Who telephoned
you?

MR MAJOVA: It was just a phone, they just phoned us. I don't know, I
wanted to know who was phoning and the person said do you want
information or do you want my name. I said I want the information. So he
said accept information as I put it to you, you must go to Krugersdorp.

MS SOOKA: Were you relieved at that time that when you knew KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	MR MAJOVA

when you read the plaque, that at least you knew that he was dead? How
did you feel about that?

MR MAJOVA: I wanted to know more about this plaque. That's why I went to
the police at Krugersdorp, at Kagiso. But I got no information.

MS SOOKA: In Rustenberg also you got no real information, except the
inquest number.

MR MAJOVA: Well, most of the police there, they told us that they were
not there at that time. There was no station at Thabani, but they heard
about the incident of the house that was bulldozed by the Bophuthatswana
police and the police from Rustenberg, because they couldn't get these
children out of the house.

MS SOOKA: Tatta, I just want to make sure, you say then that you then
heard from these police that there were these boys in the house and that
the house was then bulldozed with the boys inside the house.

MR MAJOVA: Yes.

MS SOOKA: And this was done by the Bophuthatswana police and the
Rustenberg police.

MR MAJOVA: Yes, it was done by the police, the Bophuthatswana police and
they could not get these children out of the house, and they were not
folding their hands, they were shooting. So we had the police shooting
from outside and these boys shooting from inside. We realised that they
are unable to take them out. They bulldozed the house and it fell on them.

MS SOOKA: Tatta, you mention that you went to SAFFAS undertakers, also to
find out where these boys had been buried, and they weren't able to help
you either. What did they tell you there?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	MR MAJOVA

MR MAJOVA: They said we are closing now, it is time out, because it was
about four o'clock. I had to come back - it is a distance between those
places. Then we consulted the Shell House to find out if they know about
this. I remember they came to us to Stilfontein also and they went to
Rustenberg. We came back without any information.

MR MAJOVA: You mention that you went to Shell House. They were not able
to assist you either.

MR MAJOVA: Well, they wanted to help, to try and find out where this
grave is. But they have not done so up until now.

MS SOOKA: Just a few more questions. Your son, when he was in Hewton, was
he a member of the ANC?

MR MAJOVA: Well, I am not sure. But it appears that it is so.

MS SOOKA: From the information that was given to you by the police in
Lebani, how many boys died inside this house that was bulldozed?

MR MAJOVA: In that book they showed me four names.

MS SOOKA: The other boys, did you know them?

MR MAJOVA: No, I did not know them.

MS SOOKA: Tatta, at Stilfontein during that time, was there trouble in
the township?

MR MAJOVA: No, there wasn't much but there was a bit of trouble.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Tatta. I don't have any more questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Any questions? Dr Randera?

DR RANDERA: Mr Majova, I just want to go back to your enquiries with
Shell House. Were they aware of this

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	MR MAJOVA

incident that took place in Thlabani and the killing of the children?

MR MAJOVA: When we got there we had the information there, they were
there with us.

DR RANDERA: You gave them the information or did they also have a record
of it?

MR MAJOVA: No, in Thlabani they had none, we went there together. When we
were getting there for the second time, when I went there, we went to the
Shell House people where they also gathered information.

DR RANDERA: Were you able to find out who actually put up the plaque?

MR MAJOVA: No.

DR RANDERA: The one other aspect, and I am sure our investigating team
will have to make further enquiries, is that when you enquired at the
police station in Thlabani, they actually had the name of your son in the
book. That is what you say in your statement. I am asking this question
because my understanding and what we have heard in these hearings, is
that every person who left the country and joined the ANC, was given a
pseudonym. So they all worked under different names in order to protect
themselves in the underground. So what I am saying is, it is intriguing
to me that if these four young people were killed in the house, how were
they able to find out what their names were, and the real names?

MR MAJOVA: When my boy left down to Cape Town, he had the ID. I don't
know then whether he had any other names.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Prof Meiring?

PROF MEIRING: Mr Majova, only a few questions. The first

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	MR MAJOVA

question is, the three other young men who were killed in Rustenberg,
were their graves found or is that also a mystery where they were buried?

MR MAJOVA: It appears their parents claimed their bodies.

PROF MEIRING: The parents claimed their bodies.

MR MAJOVA: It appeared so.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much.

MR MAJOVA: Because it appears they heard over the radio, but I didn't
hear anything about that.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you. Another question. Was Watson your only child or
do you have other children too?

MR MAJOVA: I have got other children, he is not the only one.

PROF MEIRING: How many children to you have?

MR MAJOVA: Six boys.

PROF MEIRING: Six boys?

MR MAJOVA: Six boys.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you so much. Then I want to ask of you, you said that
Watson was born in 1958, he disappeared and probably was killed in 1985.
That means that he was a young man of 27 when he died in Rustenberg. Do
you know whether he already was married at that stage or whether there
were children dependent upon him?

MR MAJOVA: As far as I was concerned he was not married.

PROF MEIRING: Not married and no children.

MR MAJOVA: Yes.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. Thank you so much.

CHAIRPERSON: It is not easy to know what you say you tried to comfort
people like yourself, Mr and Mrs Majova. What amazes me is that you look
so normal and when you speak it doesn't seem unusual for you, you just
mention that, you

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	MR MAJOVA

just say "I was harassed", and it is only when Commissioner Sooka tried
to find out what the form of harassment is, that you mention that you
were in fact tortured. You haven't mentioned this as being extraordinary.
I myself and I think of all us kept saying that our country is in fact an
extraordinary country, that it can have people like yourselves, people
who can remain whole, despite this deep pain. I mean, it is not only that
you lost a son, you don't know where your son is buried and you have had
to run around trying to find out the truth and you still haven't really
got the truth and you are hoping that the Commission may be able to
assist you. But we just want to say we thank God for people like you,
that you haven't gone mad. You have not even said here, I mean, all you
are asking for, is to be able to find the remains of your son so that you
can give him a proper burial. You have not spoken about anger. You have
not spoken about taking revenge. Maybe people in other communities get to
take it too much for granted. I want to say thank you, we want to say
thank you to God for people like you, that we can have people who have
suffered as much as you have suffered and that you do not seem to have a
desire for revenge. So we pray that God will continue to strengthen you
and that God will help us in the Commission to find out the truth about
your son, and that the one thing that you long for you may be able to
give your son a decent burial. Thank you.



	-----------------







KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

