
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	09-04-1997	

NAME:	NTOMBOMZI MAKAFE

CASE:	 GRAHAMSTOWN

		DAY 3

___________________________________

REVD XUNDU:	Mr Chairperson, I would like to swear in Ntombomzi Makafe.

NTOMBOMZI MAKAFE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:	How old are you Ntombomzi?

MS MAKAFE:	I am 20 years old.

CHAIRMAN:	I thought you were 12 years old. We will ask Ms Tiny Maya to
lead you with questions on behalf of the Commission.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Chairman. Ntombomzi, I would like to greet you. You
are 20 years today in 1997. You are going to tell us about your story
that happened in 1986. How old were you then?

MS MAKAFE:	Ii was 11 years old.

MS MAYA:	In your statement you said you were shot while playing with your
friends in the backyard at home, what happened?

MS MAKAFE:	We were playing together with my friends. While we were
playing, we heard a gunshot. I fell down and I lost consciousness, I woke
up the next morning, I was in Port Elizabeth in hospital. I stayed for a
month in hospital in Port Elizabeth. I was then discharged. I was
transferred here in Grahamstown, I stayed for a week here in Grahamstown.

M MAYA:	How were you injured?

MS MAKAFE:	I was injured in my stomach.

MS MAYA:	Were you operated in hospital?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, I was operated.

MS MAYA:	Were there any bullets taken out of your body?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	You were still at school, what standard were you?

MS MAKAFE:	I was in sub B.

MS MAYA:	Did you manage to go back to school?

MS MAKAFE:	No, I did not because my leg got injured.

MS MAYA:	When did you go back to school if you did?

MS MAKAFE:	I don't remember.

MS MAYA:	But you continued with your studies?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, I did.

MS MAYA:	How is your state of health now? Did you fully recover?

MS MAKAFE:	No, because if the weather is bad my leg, I feel pain in my
leg.

MS MAYA:	Do you know what was happening in the township when you got shot?

MS MAKAFE:	No, I don't know.

MS MAYA:	You were shot while you were playing?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes.

MS MAYA;	Do you know the person who shot you?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, I know him.

MS MAYA:	Who is he?

MS MAKAFE:	It was Mpukumpuku.

MS MAYA:	Is Mpukumpuku Mr Khadi?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, it was Mr Khadi.

MS MAYA:	Was Mpukumpuku charged for shooting you?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, he was arrested because we used to go to court. We went
to court twice after that, we heard that he

has passed away.

MS MAYA:	Do you know whether you were shot at the same day with these
children that were referred to here before?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Were you shot at that same day?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	What would you like the Commission to do for you? By coming here
today, what would you like us to do for you?

MS MAKAFE:	I would like to be helped.

MS MAYA:	How? Do you still need to go to other Doctors for medical
treatment?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, because my leg is not functioning well.

MS MAYA:	In which standard were you?

MS MAKAFE:	I stopped while I was doing standard 5.

MS MAYA:	Do you want to go back to school?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	We will come back to you, we will give you a chance to think. I
will now hand over to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON:	June Crichton?

MS CRICHTON:	Can you hear mr Ntombomzi? Can you hear me?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, I can hear you.

MS CRICHTON:	You were only 11 years old, what did you know about the
political situation at that time?

MS MAKAFE:	I knew nothing about politics at that time.

MS CRICHTON:	All right. And then you mentioned that there was somebody by
the name of Lindelwa, was she playing with you that day?

MS MAKAFE:	No, Lindelwa is my mother.

MS CRICHTON:	I've got one more question for you. In your statement is
says that the police claimed that the victim was shooting. Did you have a
gun?

MS MAKAFE:	No, I did not have a gun.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you, that is all I wanted to ask you. Thank you Mr
Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON:	Ntombomzi, where you were playing did you see a toyi-toyi?

MS MAKAFE:	No, we did not see any toyi-toyi.

CHAIRPERSON:	How many children were shot that day?

MS MAKAFE;	We were three. One of us passed away.

CHAIRMAN:	Do you know the name of the child that passed away?

MS MAKAFE:	Yes, it was Nontle Koliti.

CHAIRMAN:	Thank you Ntombomzi, you have already heard the testimony
presented by the gentleman who were here before you.

	You have already heard that we will meet with them again, we will also
meet with the authorities, we will try to investigate accordingly about
this matter. We thank you for coming here to give your testimony to the
Commission.

	We hope that your requests will be attended to. We will report them to
those who are in authority. Thank you.

	--------------------

