	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	MONWABISI MAKHAWULA

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:	We are going to call upon Monwabisi Makhawula. We are trying
to finish the issue, the incidents of Cradock before we go to lunch.
Reverend Xundu?

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman.

MONWABISI MAKHAWULA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	We welcome you Mr Monwabisi Makhawula and we will hand over
to Ntisiki Sandi who is going to help us to ask you questions on behalf
of the Commission. Can we please get someone to go outside to talk to the
people outside, to please keep quiet?

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairman. Mr Makhawula, in your statement you said
that if I can just summarise your statement shortly, you are a resident
here in Cradock. Is that so Mr Makhawula?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, that is so.

MR SANDI:	Please come nearer to the mike so that we can hear you. When
did you arrive here in Cradock?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I arrived here in 1960.

MR SANDI:	And you are still a resident here?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I came here with my uncle, he was a minister at the time.

MR SANDI:	Shortly as a resident of Cradock you took part and you were a
member of political organisations. What organisations are these?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	 M MAKHAWULA

MR MAKHAWULA:	I started in the 1960's together with other men who were
around here. We were together, we were members of the ANC.

MR SANDI:	Your membership or your involvement in such organisations, it
caused problems for you with the police. Can you please tell us what the
police did to you?

MR MAKHAWULA:	In 1983 we came together and we formed a Residents'
Association called CRADORA, it was known as Cradock Residents' Civic
Association.

MR SANDI:	Who are these people which formed this organisation with you?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I am talking about Matthew Goniwe, Fort Xalaha, Sparo and
Mrs Sibanda, Mrs General and Mrs Kaye.

MR SANDI:	You formed this organisation and you worked with the aim of the
residents. You said that in 1983 the problems started. Can you please
explain that?

MR MAKHAWULA:	There were always problems here in Cradock, but we formed
this organisation to try and solve problems in 1983 here in Cradock. I
think it was between June and July in 1983 when we formed this
organisation, the Residents' Association.

MR SANDI:	At this time Mr Makhawula, I will let you explain your story to
us from the beginning to the end and I will not interrupt you except if
there is a need for me to do that, and I will do that. After that we will
ask questions. You can continue with your story Mr Makhawula.

MR MAKHAWULA:	Thank you. In 1983 when we formed this Residents'
Association, one of the main aims of this was the rent issue and in 1983
when here in Cradock, a new location was being built, it was known as
Thlatha and the municipality here or the council here in Cradock, made a

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	M MAKHAWULA

sliding scale and that was unusual here in Cradock.

	People had to pay rent according to their salaries and that was unusual
to the community in Cradock and they didn't consult with the people of
Cradock.

	They were just told about it. What was very painful to the people and
what was not acceptable to the people was that if your house is the same
as your neighbour's house, it was with the same bricks and everything was
the same, and you have to pay R100-00 and your neighbour maybe had to pay
R500-00.

	And that was unacceptable to the people. And the people did not like
this. Even the Government and the municipality did not like our
organisation. And it was found out that the issues here were different.
There was a political intention behind, there were community councillors
and they were not acceptable in the townships because people would ask
questions that if there is such a problem, why can't community
councillors do something.

	They were fighting against the Residents' Association and Matthew Goniwe
was pointed out to be the one who was responsible for this Association.
As a result of this, he was dismissed from school.

	And that was also unacceptable to people because they liked Matthew
Goniwe very much. And above all he was good at school and they wanted him
to be a principal in the school because when he came to the school,
things were better, there was respect at school and at the end of the
year, the results were better than the previous years.

	So the people of the township were satisfied with the work of Matthew
Goniwe. Again, I made a mistake that he was dismissed, he was transferred
to Graaff-Reinet and that was

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	M MAKHAWULA

not acceptable to people here in Cradock.

	When the people analyzed this they found out that there is a danger in
this. That since they knew that the police were after him and suddenly
they stopped and they said that they are waiting for the schools to be
closed and the children to stop school in November and after that they
send this telegram that he has been transferred to Graaff-Reinet.

	And the people saw that there is some danger in this that the police
might do something to him on the way there.

MR SANDI:	Did he actually, has he been transferred, Mr Goniwe?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes. They transferred him.

MR SANDI:	Did he to this place, to Graaff-Reinet?

MR MAKHAWULA:	No, he did not go.

MR SANDI:	According to history if I still remember well, I think Mr
Goniwe was finally dismissed because he did not agree to go to
Graaff-Reinet?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, he was dismissed from work.

MR SANDI:	Let us now come to where you have complaints.

MR MAKHAWULA:	Can you please repeat your question.

MR SANDI:	All these things that was happening here in Cradock, you had
complaints about them. Can you please tell us whether you were harassed
by the police as a member of this Residents' Association?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, that happened a lot sir because in this issue of
Matthew Goniwe and the school, when he was dismissed from school, when he
was transferred from school, we went there a lot because this issue was
under my control.

	So I was the one who was responsible for ensuring that he was not
transferred. We went to Regional Director who was Mabel at that time, but
we didn't get anything from him. CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	M MAKHAWULA

MR SANDI:	Did you take any steps as the residents complaining about his
dismissal?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, we did. Firstly when he was dismissed students at
school boycotted their classes, that was the beginning of the school
boycott when they dismissed him.

	When the officials said they can't do anything because he doesn't want
to listen to the authorities. And that was the beginning of the school
boycott in Cradock.

	It started in the high school here in Cradock, Lingelihle High School
and today it is known as Matthew Goniwe. They boycotted classes in that
school and other schools also joined.

	There was a students' organisation at that time. When they were trying
to get together to solve this problem, the police banned all the students
and for the residents.

	If you wanted to have a meeting, you would have to go to them so that
you can get permission and they would ask you why do you want to have a
meeting. The students went to the police to ask for permission, actually
they did not go there to ask for permission but they were asking a place
where they can hold their meeting.

MR SANDI:	Mr Makhawula this step, the one of the boycott and other steps
taken at that time concerning this issue of Mr Goniwe, were all the
members of the Association supporting this?

MR MAKHAWULA:	This decision was taken by the people of the community. In
the meeting people said that Matthew Goniwe is not going to
Graaff-Reinet, that was the decision taken by the people.

MR SANDI:	Did you see this step as the wise step that students have to
boycott schools for such a long time? What

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	M MAKHAWULA

was your own opinion?

MR MAKHAWULA:	When this decision was taken, we did not know for how long
it would last. But at that time, I was supporting the decision because
when they transferred Matthew to Graaff-Reinet, they did not follow the
right channels.

	There was a school committee and the school committee was not aware, the
school committee from Senqali Junior Secondary School was not aware that
Matthew Goniwe was transferred. This was done by the officials and they
told the school community after they made this decision.

MR SANDI:	In the incidents that happened here in Cradock, was your house
once burnt down?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, my house was burnt down.

MR SANDI:	According to your knowledge or your opinion, can you please
tell us why did this happen?

MR MAKHAWULA:	My house was burnt down by the authorities. Firstly as we
were members of this Residents' Association, three men were arrested.
They were arrested due to Section 28 at that time, under the Act of
Section 28. I was not arrested.

	And that surprised me, but I did not understand why they didn't arrest
me, but on the other hand I was happy because it was not going to be a
right thing that we all get arrested.

	And the authority, the security people used to come to me every now and
again. They sometimes came to my house and looked around and they just
went without saying anything.

	If they see me outside, they would take me to the car, take me to town
and after a while, take me back home. But I found out that they were
trying to show people that I am

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7	M MAKHAWULA

together with them, I am on their side.

	They were also saying this to people, that I am working with them.

MR SANDI:	In other words are you saying that they were trying to cause
conflict between members of CRADORA?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, they were trying to cause conflict between us because
we were so united in CRADORA. So they were trying that there should be a
conflict between us.

MR SANDI:	You said that according to your opinion your house was burnt
down by the authorities. By that, do you mean the police?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I mean the security police because the security police,
they came to me. It was Lieutenant Fouche, Wessel Hoog and Labuschagne.
They came to my house, they were pretending to be visitors and they just
came in and they talked amongst themselves. They didn't talk to me, they
didn't talk to my wife, but they were in my house, sitting in my house.

MR SANDI:	At the time this was happening, was it during the day?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, it was during the day. It was between three and four
in the afternoon. They just came in my house and they relaxed and after a
while, they went out and they left.

	I was surprised by that, I was asking myself why did they come to my
house because they did not talk to me, until we went to sleep. At night
on that day, we heard that the house was burning down. It was then that
we realised that their presence here during the day, they were looking
for his house, they were trying to find out who was sleeping in one room
and they were studying my house at that time

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8	M MAKHAWULA

because they just came in and they talked to each other.

	My wife was there and Buthas was there, but they didn't talk with us,
they just talked amongst themselves.

MR SANDI:	How long did they stay in your house?

MR MAKHAWULA:	It is a long time sir. I think it is about an hour.

MR SANDI:	But that very same day your house burnt down. What did you see
that night when your house was burning down?

MR MAKHAWULA:	They threw a bomb in the window and that was a very
powerful bomb because it just exploded immediately and no one could go
through the door, but we managed to go out through the windows.

	If we tried to go through the doors, we couldn't because the bomb was in
the dining room. If you go out of my room, you go through the dining
room, so if you are going through that door, you are going to that bomb.

MR SANDI:	Were there any people injured in your house at that time?

MR MAKHAWULA:	No, nobody was injured.

MR SANDI:	Your furniture was burnt down?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes. My furniture burnt down and people, the neighbours
came immediately after they heard this and they tried to help us.

MR SANDI:	Did you go to the police to lay a charge concerning this issue?

MR MAKHAWULA:	No I didn't open a docket sir. I didn't go to the police to
lay a charge or to open a docket, but I did go to the police, but I did
not want to go there because what made me angry is that I would go to the
police to report this and I knew that they were aware that my house

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9	M MAKHAWULA

was going to be burnt down.

	But I was advised to go to the police because people said that I would
be arrested for burning my own house, I went to the police then, but
after a while I found out that my house was burnt by the police, I then
went there and opened a docket.

MR SANDI:	Where did you find out that your house was burnt down by the
police?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I found this out within the community. One man confessed.
Lass confessed and he said he was sent by the police to throw that bomb
in my house.

MR SANDI:	What did Lass say was the reason for this?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Can you please repeat, sir?

MR SANDI:	Is it Lass or Laso?

MR MAKHAWULA:	It is Lass.

MR SANDI:	What did he say was the reason for the police to send him to do
this?

MR MAKHAWULA:	He didn't say but he just said that they told him to go
there and throw the petrol - this bomb.

MR SANDI:	As a person who opened a docket, did you tell the police that
Lass said that he was sent by the police to burn your house?

MR MAKHAWULA:	He confessed and as I was opening this docket, they did
have the confession.

MR SANDI:	Lass confessed to whom?

MR MAKHAWULA:	He confessed to the late Mrs Molly Blackburn.

MR SANDI:	Was there any person interpreting while he was confessing to
Molly Blackburn?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Who was that person?

MR MAKHAWULA:	It was the late Matthew Goniwe.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	10	M MAKHAWULA

MR SANDI:	After Matthew Goniwe was killed, what did the police say why
did this case not continue?

MR MAKHAWULA:	They said that this case cannot continue because the person
who was interpreting in that confession, has passed away. And they also
said that on their side the person who interpreted for them, I think it
was Aron, they also said that he has also passed away. So my case was
dismissed in that way.

	That surprised me, because Matthew was there only to interpret, he was
not there when my house was being burnt down. He was arrested.

MR SANDI:	And the people who was incriminated in this case, they were
still alive? This case was dismissed because Mr Goniwe was dead?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Did this happen again or did anything happen to you because you
were involved in political organisations?

MR MAKHAWULA:	My house was burnt again. Before that, it was stoned, but I
am not sure whether those were stones or what, but the people who were
doing that, were the police.

MR SANDI:	What was happening on this day if you can say shortly?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Nothing was happening on that day, it was quiet.

MR SANDI:	Were there any threats against you because you were a member of
a political organisation?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, there were various threats.

MR SANDI:	Can you please just explain to us Mr Makhawula?

MR MAKHAWULA:	The main threats, since it was said that I worked together
with the Boers, it was said that I was an informer and I was accused of
misleading people because I

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	11	M MAKHAWULA

said that people must not pay rent.

	And people were following me, they were following my command. And it was
said I do this because I was rich and they said that I owned a
Supermarket in the Transkei and I owned a double house, double storey
house in Transkei.

	People were toyi-toying concerning these allegations that I am a rich
man in Transkei and I am misleading people here in Cradock.

MR SANDI:	These butcheries, supermarkets and double storey house, did you
really own these properties?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Sir, when these things were rumoured in the township, I was
surprised because I am just a dog, I can't own a supermarket.

	But this became clear because later on it was found out that in the work
of these Boers, as they were trying to destroy the organisations and the
townships, there was an Indian man in the community, he owned a shop and
he was running, he was the owner of the shop.

	But I am not sure about this, but I think he was not the owner of that
shop, but he was just being used. That shop belonged to SANLAM. One day
we had a mass meeting in the hall and in that shop the youth used to go
there all the time, and in that mass meeting in the hall that Indian man
came to the meeting ...

REVD FINCA:	Excuse me Mr Makhawula, I know that in the Xhoza words the
name of the Indian man is used differently. I would like you to refer to
this guy as an Indian man, not as a Kula, because it is like a kaffir.

MR MAKHAWULA:	In that mass meeting on that day, this Indian man came
together with the youth. He was to be a speaker in that meeting.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	12	M MAKHAWULA

	We were surprised by this because I did not know this Indian man really
and I was surprised to see him because it is difficult to give such an
opportunity to someone you do not know.

	And then we said that we will meet with him the following day. We
refused to give him permission to be a speaker in that meeting.

MR SANDI:	Mr Makhawula, let us now continue. At home you were arrested
with the children. There was a young boy, he was 14 years old. When was
this?

MR MAKHAWULA:	That was in 1986.

MR SANDI:	Were you being arrested under the State of Emergency?

MR MAKHAWULA:	In 1986 on the day the second State of Emergency was
declared.

MR SANDI:	How long did you stay in prison together with your son who was
14 years old?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I stayed there for 14 days.

MR SANDI:	What happened to you while you were there, when you were inside
there?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Nothing happened to me there. My son stayed there for five
months, my 14 year old son stayed there for five months.

MR SANDI:	As you were a leader and the police were trying to cause
conflict between you and the community, can you say that the police were
successful in trying to do this?

MR MAKHAWULA:	No, they were not successful because people around here,
people here in Cradock - we thought previously about these things, they
were aware of such situations.

MR SANDI:	In your organisation were there people who were believing what
the police were saying?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	13	M MAKHAWULA

MR MAKHAWULA:	In the organisation there were people who used to believe
what the police was saying about me.

MR SANDI:	Is that all you wanted to say in front of this Commission Mr
Makhawula about what happened to you?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I wanted to talk about this Indian man.

MR SANDI:	I would ask you to drop this issue of the Indian man because
you said that you were suspecting him.

	But you may contact our investigators to talk about this Indian man.
Because what is important when you come in front of this Commission, we
have to focus on what happened to you, that's why I asked you if there is
anything you wanted to say about the events that happened to you while
you were a member of this organisation.

MR MAKHAWULA:	There are a lot of things that happened to me sir. Because
one day I was at home and I heard a toyi-toyi coming towards me house and
I heard that I was going to be killed.

	I stayed there waiting. When the toyi-toyi arrived in front of my house
others passed and others went back. But after a while I finally stopped
them because they were fighting. Initially they came to kill me, but I
ended up trying to stop them because they were fighting amongst children.

	That is one of the issues. But before this one there were rumours that I
was going to be killed. I heard that while I was in Gauteng and when I
heard this, I came back. Fortunately there was a kombi where Mrs Goniwe,
Mrs Xalata were in the kombi and I came back with them.

	When I arrived here, those rumours were true and after that there was
this toyi-toyi. There was another attempt, two toyi-toyi's, but they were
unsuccessful.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	14	M MAKHAWULA

MR SANDI:	What was the reason for these attempts to be unsuccessful, if
you can just clarify that shortly?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Shortly the reason why these were not successful is that
the truth came out and secondly as I have already said here before,
people here in Cradock were oppressed for a long time and they knew that
the police were misleading them all the time, so it was not easy for them
to accept something they were not sure about.

	Thirdly what helped is that I was working with people, I was involved in
the community activities and for that reason the people didn't believe
these allegations.

MR SANDI;	At the time the councillors' houses were burnt down, were you
ever arrested?

MR MAKHAWULA:	When my house was being burnt down and the following night,
they did not burn down the councillors' houses, but they were stoned and
the windows were broken, they broke the windows.

	They said that those were attempts to burn down the councillors' houses,
I was then arrested for those incidents.

MR SANDI:	Were you sentenced in court?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I did not go to any court of law but they released me
because they said that the witnesses were not available and I don't know
even today who those witnesses were.

MR SANDI:	Is that all you want to say Mr Makhawula before I hand over to
the Chairperson?

MR MAKHAWULA:	I have an amputated left leg and in 1984 I requested a
pension and the District Surgeon at that time helped me and the papers
went to Pretoria. They came through, I managed to get the pension but at
that time he

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	15	MAKHAWULA

was not aware that I was involved in political organisations and I
received the pension money for the first time.

	When it came for the second time, I was in prison and they charged me
with fraud because they said that my wife was working and I was not
supposed to get a pension.

MR SANDI:	What happened to that fraud case?

MR MAKHAWULA:	The fraud case went to court.

MR SANDI:	Were you sentenced in court, were you found guilty?

MR MAKHAWULA:	No, I was not found guilty in court.

MR SANDI;	In other words you want to say the police who were after you
had an effect in the case against you? Were they involved in this case?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, the police were involved in this case against me.

MR SANDI:	In conclusion Mr Makhawula, were there any people who came to
you to apologise? Maybe people who said that that attempt by the police,
that you were an informer was successful, did they come to you to
apologise?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, there are a lot of people who came to me to apologise.

MR SANDI:	Are there any people you expect now to come to you to apologise
as others have already come?

MRS MAKHAWULA;	Yes, I am still waiting for others to come and apologise
and I would welcome them. They can come even today.

MR SANDI:	Is that all Mr Makhawula?

MR MAKHAWULA:	Yes, that is all for now sir, thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Makhawula. I apologise for disturbing you at the
time you were giving your testimony,

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	16	

but I wanted to ask you to refer to that man as an Indian man because we
have to avoid to use an unacceptable language in our hearings according
to the new laws.

	You have given us a long story, but you have given us a picture that
would make us to respect the Cradock community. The differences between
the leaders of our people is a very painful thing to us. It discourages
any progress and any nation building.

	The differences between our communities, they lead to conflict amongst
ourselves. That is why when we were still fighting, we used to raise our
arms and say Amandla Power. We are trying to be united.

	You have given us a picture of the Cradock community and you have shown
us that in such times, this community tried to be united. Maybe that is
why Cradock is an example to many places. We have seen that in your
statement there are things that need to be rectified.

	There are things that need to be said so that we can be united,
especially us as leaders. If there is something we can do as we are here
as the Commissioners, to forward the step, we will happily do that
because even now we believe that even if we are liberated now and we are
represented in Parliament, we still have to fight for the nation building
and this needs our leaders to be united.

	Your testimony was painful and long, but we thank you for letting us to
focus on reconciliation in our own communities.

	--------------------

