	1	G S MAKOLA


	1	G S MAKOLA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.08.1996	NAME:	GODFREY SENGATHEDI MAKOLA

CASE:	JB01023	-	PRETORIA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: Chairperson, the following witness is Mr Godfrey Sengathedi
Makola and I will ask him to please come forward. Mr Makola, if you would
just please put on the headphones. Thank you very much. Mr Makola, a warm
welcome to you from the Commission. I understand that you are a teacher
at Soshanguve. Is that right? Okay and you have come to tell us about the
death of your brother because it seems as there were many people killed
in the march in Mamelodi on the 21st of November 1985. This is yet
another sad, sad story. You can hear alright?

MR MAKOLA: Alright.

DR BORAINE: Okay, good. Mr Makola, you have somebody with you. You having
a problem about hearing?

MR MAKOLA: Alright.

DR BORAINE: You okay now?

MR MAKOLA: Okay.

DR BORAINE: Could you tell us who is with you today?

MR MANTHATA: Yes, it is my younger sister.

DR BORAINE: We are very pleased to see you. Thank you and welcome to you
as well. Thank you for coming with your brother. Mr Makola, Mr Wynand
Malan is going to lead you in a moment, but as you know you have to take
the oath before you tell your story. So would you please stand. Could you
stand please.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	G S MAKOLA

GODFREY SENGATHEDI MAKOLA: (Duly sworn in, states).

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Please be seated. Mr Malan.

MR MALAN: Mr Makola.

INTERPRETER: Sorry, the Interpreters would just like to point out that he
might be on the wrong channel. We suggest he switch to three.

MR MALAN: Could you check whether the channel there is on channel three?

INTERPRETER: I will just help.

DR BORAINE: Are you hearing now?

MR MAKOLA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: That is much better. You must have been lip reading before
which is very good.

MR MALAN: Mr Makola, you heard the preceding two witnesses giving
evidence relating to the same incident that you will be telling us about.
Please tell us your story. You have given us a statement, but if you will
publicly also tell us, in your words, what happened that day.

MR MAKOLA: On the 21st of the 11th month 1985 in Mamelodi there was a
march organised to discuss the rent issue. My younger brother Thabo
Melvern Makola attended that meeting. Unfortunately we were in Soshanguve
at that time. As a Comrade he joined those people and he represented my
aunt at that march. After some few days we learnt that the child did not
return back from that march. We heard that people died at that march. I
was not in, around Transvaal, I was outside Soshanguve and Mamelodi. I
learned that this child died. That is when we started looking for him
with my father, but unfortunately we searched the boy for about 15, 19.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	G S MAKOLA

MR MALAN: I think it may be easier for you while you are giving your
testimony to take the headphones off. So when you finish and I speak
English again, then you can listen to the translation.

MR MAKOLA: Alright, no problem otherwise. So on the 1st of 1985, during
November time the Civic of Mamelodi went for rent march. So I think it
was organised by the Civic and after that when they went there. So my
younger brother was visiting there the aunt. Unfortunately, he joined the
Comrades as usual. Then after a few days we heard from the aunt that the
boy did not return. So we had a problem. After that we went looking for
him from police station to another police station. Even at the Government
Mortuary. Unfortunately, we did not get him at the Government Mortuary.
So the search was for about 19 days. So we went to the police station
again, we went to the mortuary again.

	After 19 days we heard from rumours that they were buried somewhere. So
someone told us that, I am not quite sure about that one, but they said
that, as rumours say, they were buried somewhere in Mamelodi at the base
of the mountain. So after 14 days, I mean 19 days, so we went back to the
same mortuary, we went there, but fortunately enough, that time we got
him. So we questioned them what happened, why we came here for the first
time, but they could not explain. So as a Phillistus said and Mr Msiza
said, we went to Pretoria North Court. Unfortunately, everything was not
gloomy during that time. Otherwise even the lawyers of LR, LHR were a
little bit jumpy when we asked them. One of them said some funny stories
about everything. So I became disillusioned and went away and never went
back to the same

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	G S MAKOLA

court. Even today we are still waiting for these people to tell us what
happened.

	Now what is important today, I think, I am interested with the person
who gave orders that day to mow people down and the other question I am
asking is that why for 19 days we have been looking to and for, but we
did not get the corpse of this young boy.

MR MALAN: Sorry, you may continue. The indication was just not to beat on
the table because the noise comes through.

MR MAKOLA: Okay.

MR MALAN: You are welcome to continue.

MR MAKOLA: Right.

MR MALAN: You asked a question.

MR MAKOLA: Yes, my question is that I just want to find out about if it
is a General, he must give us, they must give us the name of the person
who was in charge of the army or whatever police that day. Then the
question which must be answered, again, is that for 19 days looking for a
corpse. What was happening to this young man because some of his clothes
were, I mean, were stinking teargas. We thought, perhaps, he was shot,
taken into a Hippo and after that, that is what we think, then tortured
and after that being gunned again. So, another thing which worries us too
much because the bullet was in a sort of a "Z". Meaning that he was shot
in a "Z" fashion.

MR MALAN: Thank you Mr Makola. If you would not mind, I have a question
or two just to follow up.

MR MAKOLA: You are welcome.

MR MALAN: You heard the previous witness giving his testimony, Mr Msiza.

MR MAKOLA: Mr Msiza.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	G S MAKOLA

MR MALAN: You heard him when he spoke.

MR MAKOLA: Right.

MR MALAN: Just before you. He referred to an open inquest that was held.
Did you attend that? Was there any inquest that you attended relating to
your.

MR MAKOLA: Yes, I remember going to Pretoria North Court.

MR MALAN: So that was the same inquest into the mass ...

MR MAKOLA: I think so.

MR MALAN: ... killings and was there, was there ever a post mortem done
on your brother that you have any results on?

MR MAKOLA: No results were given to us because I went for one day and I
was disillusioned because things were not running in a legal way. Let me
say we were not welcome.

MR MALAN: You have not had any feedback from anyone since the death of
your brother?

MR MAKOLA: No.

MR MALAN: As you have heard we have some other evidence. We will follow
through on this. We will probably get more information and we hope that
we, in due time, can come back to you and give you some more information
than we presently have. I hand you back to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Any, Russell Ally.

DR ALLY: Godfrey, you say that you have a suspicion that your brother may
have been tortured, that he may not have been killed on the day of the
march. Now why would you have that suspicion? Was he an organiser in, of
the march itself? Was he quite active politically?

MR MAKOLA: He was not, he was just a youth who was taking part in a
march. So what I suspect when I say that perhaps he was reshot, perhaps
after being arrested or injured, it is what I think.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	G S MAKOLA

DR ALLY: And that suspicion, are you basing it on the fact that you did
not find him in the mortuary the first time, but only 19 days later? Is
that what makes you suspicious?

MR MAKOLA: Yes, 19 days later.

DR ALLY: How old was your brother because I do not think you said it in
your statement?

MR MAKOLA: At that time he was 16 years.

DR ALLY: He was 16 years old at the time.

MR MAKOLA: Right.

DR ALLY: Now you were not actually a participant in that march yourself.

MR MAKOLA: No.

DR ALLY: I mean, you heard about it later?

MR MAKOLA: Right.

DR ALLY: Now, this, the Mayor who gave the, who said you have got five
minutes to disperse, before this incident were there any other
confrontations between him and the community? Was there a, was there bad
blood? Do you know that, other protests, demonstrations against the Mayor
that you were aware of?

MR MAKOLA: Yes, as far as I am concerned during that time most of the
Councillors were not popular with the community. They were not popular.

DR ALLY: But had there been any other confrontations before, direct
confrontations between Councillors ...

MR MAKOLA: I do not remember. I do not remember.

DR ALLY: You do not. Thanks.

CHAIRPERSON: Tom Manthata.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you. From where we come we have always wanted things
to be done on reasonable ground, reasonable bases. Where these are not
too clear we often ask for

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	G S MAKOLA

clarification. Why would the students get into a rent boycott or a rent
march, a matter which is primarily that of the parents?

MR MAKOLA: So I think that a student is part of the community and he must
take part where the community is taking part. So I think he was adult
enough to go to the march because he was one the people who must assist
the community for a march.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Sir. We would want to say we will do all we can to
try and answer at least the two questions, I mean, the one who gave the
orders and as Wynand Malan has pointed out, we will hope to get to the
bottom of incidents such as the one that you are describing and that we
may be able to provide some of the answers that people are seeking.

	The second question that you asked is something that struck us in a
number of places where people have been given the runaround. You go to a
police station, you go to a hospital, you got to a mortuary and things,
you just do not seem to get to the bottom of things and we are very
sorry, I mean, because that just adds to the pain that people were
experiencing at the time because it would be far better to know as soon
as you can the fate of your loved one. It seems to have been an
additional torture that was being inflicted on people that they did not
know. I mean often they were treated harshly. If they were not two people
they thought would provide them with information and so we will also try
to find out why it was that it took 19 days that you went to the mortuary
on the first occasion and 19 days later the corpse is in that same
mortuary where originally you came away with empty hands, but we also
just want to

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	G S MAKOLA

express our sympathy as a Commission as I have tried to do with others of
those who have been testifying. Although it may seem easy, it is not
easy. We have sat now since January and have heard evidence from April
and it is heavy for us as well as we hear of the anguish of people.

	Even here we get another instance of how young people paid a very heavy
price on behalf of the community to bring us to the point we have reached
in our land. I thank you very much and may God strengthen you and your
family.

MR MAKOLA: The last thing I want to ask is that, perhaps, we have streets
around Pretoria which I think, perhaps, it can be the name of the street
can be named, this name like, streets like Lotz Street, Boomstraat, can
be Melvern Makola. Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Order please. Although you may be saying it lightly we have
a Reparations and Rehabilitations Committee and that is a Committee that
must make recommendations to the President about how you make reparation
to some extent to people and sometimes it is to the community and it may,
sometimes, be by the kind of thing that you are saying which, I mean, we
are taking lightly, but I would like to tell you that we are taking
seriously as some of the suggestions.

	------------------------------















PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

