
	1	M MAKOPE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 30 APRIL 1996 	NAME: MABEL MATLAKALA MAKOPE

CASE: GO/O106 JOHANNESBURG

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: Chairperson the following witness is Mrs Mabel Matlakala
Makope, and I would be grateful if she would come to the witness stand
please. Could you please make sure you've got the earphones on your head.
Mrs Makope can you hear me on the earphones?

MS MAKOPE: Yes I can hear you.

DR BORAINE: Can I ask you, you have brought somebody with you, is this
somebody to support you, who is that please?

MS MAKOPE: This is my sister.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much, and we would like to welcome your sister
as well and we are so grateful that you've got somebody to come along
with you and go home with you as well. Mrs Makope you will tell the story
of a third person who disappeared and in some strange way these three
names have become linked and you will tell us what happened in July 1987
and then what happened subsequently when you first discovered what really
happened to your husband. I am going to ask my colleague Tom Manthata to
help you to tell that story, but before I call on him I would be grateful
if you will please stand to take the oath.

MABEL MATLALAKA MAKOPE: (sworn states)

DR BORAINE: Please be seated and Mr Manthata, I will hand it over to you
now.

MR MANTHATA: Sister Matlakala I want to first ask you a

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	M MAKOPE

question about this surname, is it Makope or Makupe?

MS MAKOPE: It's Makope.

MR MANTHATA: Oh yes it's Makope. Please relax. I am going to ask two or
three questions and then just give me answers. Where do you live?

MS MAKOPE: We live at Mamelodi in Pretoria.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you. Do you have children?

MS MAKOPE: Yes we have three children.

MR MANTHATA: Are they at school?

MS MAKOPE: Yes they are at school.

MR MANTHATA: Before Andrew's disappearance what was he working?

MS MAKOPE: He was running an undertaker, it was his brother's undertaker.
His brother was out and he left it with him.

MR MANTHATA: Can you explain to us how Andrew disappeared?

MS MAKOPE: On the 17th we only saw that he was not yet back home. I had a
three-week old baby. When the baby was supposed to be a month old, the
following day and the father just disappeared. I didn't see Andrew that
day. I saw him only during the day when he went to town to buy clothes
for the child and he said he has a pain in the leg and he wants to go to
the doctor. I was only surprised to see it was four o'clock and he wasn't
coming back. And then I realised it's now six o'clock, I have to call and
find out his whereabouts. They said to me no he picked up his belongings
and he went home. I said maybe he's gone somewhere else. He will come
back. That was the situation till the next morning.

	At eight o'clock I called his place of work and then I discovered that
it wasn't open. I called his granny, that's JOHANNESBURG
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	M MAKOPE

Andrew's granny. I called her and she said I went to work to find out
what was happening, Andrew left with the keys and everything. And she
called me and she said we broke the key, we will buy another one, let's
just go and search for him. We went to the police station and I gave them
the statement. That was the first day.

	I was welcomed by Mr Phuta. In the middle of the statement he said no, I
am not going to write this statement. Are you telling me this is Freddy's
brother? No, maybe Andrew went along with his brother and he left the
statement in the middle. But tomorrow morning make it a point that you
are here.

	Well the following day I went early. I remained there until it was one.
I even requested them to fetch my child because I didn't feed the child
at all. Many White policemen came in. They took me into Sergeant
Ghanyani's office and they said to me your husband has run away from you,
he's in Botswana. If I really agree with what they say they will go to
Botswana and go and search for him. They will only do that if I give them
certain information. I didn't know anything. And they told me they will
build me a house. They even indicated that he left me with a very small
baby. I said to them there is nothing I can tell you. 	Well I left the
police station. They said they will call me back. They called me, they
asked me questions relating to Freddy as well as Andrew. I told them
never to ask me any question about Freddy, what I want is only Andrew.
And they said Andrew has been picked up by his brother because he wants
to go and be with him. They never contacted me anymore.

	We started our own investigations. We went to the

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	M MAKOPE

hospitals. I started losing my mind. I was sick. Andrew's mother and
Andrew's father supported me throughout until today, because since his
disappearance I have never been employed.

MR MANTHATA: The policeman you said it's Phuta, Kuputa? Who is this
Phuta, were you used to him?

MS MAKOPE: He was the policeman at the charge office at Mamelodi police
station. The next day when I came they had already phoned the Compol
policemen but I never saw him again. Whenever I got to the police station
he is no longer there until today.

MR MANTHATA: Who is this Laghanyan(?)?

MS MAKOPE: He is a big man, he is a senior policeman in Mamelodi.

MR MANTHATA: According to your knowledge was Andrew involved in any
political organisations, ANC or PAC?

MS MAKOPE: No Andrew wasn't involved in any organisation. But Andrew used
to visit his brother outside the country. He used to take him money or
other things that his brother required. On one day he told me that my
brother calls me quite a lot, but one day the police are going to arrest
me. So I said leave him, stop going to see your brother. You can make use
of other means of sending him money, don't go to him. He said that if I
don't go I will die. I don't know what he was scared of or why was he
obligated to see him. All I knew is that he was not politically involved.

(Excuse me we cannot hear the speaker)

MR MANTHATA: When he said he was afraid to go to Botswana to see his
brother didn't he say that what he was afraid of was the police inside
the country?

MS MAKOPE: I really do not know what he was afraid of

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	M MAKOPE

because it had been quite a long time that he had been looking after his
brother was out of the country, but it looks like he was obligated to
look after his brother.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you. The mistake is that here in the statement they
said he once worked for the police up until there was a time they no
longer trusted him. They thought he was going to reveal him.

MS MAKOPE: No I do not know that.

MR MANTHATA: Have you now given up in finding out what - have you been
trying the traditional witchdoctors?

MS MAKOPE: Many of these witchdoctors continue to tell us that he's
there, he's still alive, but according to me, because he kept on going
outside the country, I began to realise that he would not be alive, and
where would he be you know, how could he just disappear with no trace. I
realise that there was no place where they could hide him. But then I
began to believe in miracles that maybe some miracles could happen, we
will just see him appearing.

MR MANTHATA: You said one day you were told by a person that he could
have been taken by police in a combi?

MS MAKOPE: You see at the time when he disappeared we didn't know what
had happened to him, he had just gone to work as far as we were
concerned. But there is a person who came, a ...(indistinct), apparently
he went to the business and found Andrew's aunt and he told Andrew's aunt
that at the time when they took Andrew he was with him. That was a
four-way, so she was going to get off at the corner and come up, but
apparently when he arrived there they stopped his car and they told this
lady get inside. There were two people with guns and they grabbed him out
of his car and they put him inside the combi, and they told that girl that

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	M MAKOPE

she must come back inside the car. She had already alighted out of the
car. So somebody was driving the car with this girl and they were
following this combi and they went passed home. Many people did see this
combi because they knew this combi, but they were surprised that this
combi was going at such a high speed. But they just drove past home. But
after they had turned the corner they hooted to stop the car and then the
car stopped. The asked this girl if you know the shortest way to
Botswana, and this girl said I don't know anything about Botswana. And
then they drove towards Cullinan. They came out through the Cullinan
route. When they arrived at a depot, there was some depot somewhere
before, before you arrived at Cullinan, they stopped there in Andrew's
car and Andrew's car stopped and the combi also stopped behind it. Those
who were in the combi came towards the window of that, Andrew's car and
said get out of the car. She thought they were going to kill her. They
said this Andrew, we have been sent by his brother to come and fetch him.
If you can leave here and go and tell his wife what happened you are also
going to disappear the same way that Andrew. But another person said no,
we are not sent by his brother, we are the police. We have come to take
him because he transports dangerous weapons between the country - between
South Africa and outside, and then the other one said no he deals in
drugs. But don't tell anybody what's happened, we are going to take you
the same way. Just go home. That's why she came to us rather than going
to the police. She was scared, this woman, this lady.

MR MANTHATA: It would seem like - did she say that she went to Cullinan?

MS MAKOPE: No it was before they arrived at Cullinan.

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	M MAKOPE

There was a street that goes towards Cullinan. They came out of Mamelodi,
they just dropped her at some depot before Cullinan but she doesn't know
where they went to. It was winter and it was getting dark. She walked
from the place up until - she was too scared to get a taxi.

MR MANTHATA: But when you leave Mamelodi you pass through Cullinan before
you go to Vlakplaas.

MS MAKOPE: Excuse me?

MR MANTHATA: According to what Mamasela said - that is you got this from
Mamasela's statement in the newspaper, but what happened to this lady
after she had told you all this story?

MS MAKOPE: When I went to the police station giving them the statement
which they didn't take, they said I must bring this lady. I went at her
home. I contacted her. She didn't refuse. She went with me. The first day
I went to the police station the Mamelodi police, they took her before
the Compol police came, they said they were going to arrest her because
it would seem like she knew where Andrew had gone to. They didn't put her
in the same room where I was, they just took her away. After the Compol
police came they released her and I was the one who remained behind.

MR MANTHATA: When you went to Compol she didn't come with you to Compol?

MS MAKOPE: We didn't go to Compol. I don't know if they called her to
Compol thereafter. That was the last day I saw her while I was still busy
with these Compol police.

MR MANTHATA: How is the business going on, is it going on?

MS MAKOPE: Yes his brother is back. His brother is back and he is looking
after the business.

MR MANTHATA: Could you tell us how the Commission could

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	M MAKOPE

assist you?

MS MAKOPE: I have got a problem. I think Andrew is not a dog. I don't
think he should have died the way he died. If he was guilty or killed
somebody they should have arrested him.

	The second thing, he's been gone for eight years, nobody told us
anything. Why didn't they tell me then that they had killed him.

	The third thing, I have to bring the children up on my own. The youngest
one is in standard two, he is eight years old. The second one is 11 years
old. The first one is 18 years old. He is in standard ten. These children
are growing up and if they have to go to university what am I going to do?

	Another problem that I have I am suffering the - I mean these children
are asking me questions since they said Andrew Makope died the children
were very disturbed when they heard the news. They said if father had
died when are you going to bury him. I have to answer so many questions.
And this upset my family every day. The elder one is worse. He has now
got lots of headaches and is a very disturbed child. I don't understand
why we should suffer like this. I am finished.

CHAIRMAN: Thank you Tom, thank you Mamma.

DR BORAINE: Could you just make sure that you have got the earphones so
we can talk to each other. Are you alright? I would like to ask you one
question and I also want to correct something. Firstly you read about the
killing of your husband in 1996 in the City Press, is that right? Have
you had any contact from any official, any police, anyone who came to
tell you what had happened?

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	M MAKOPE

MS MAKOPE: No, nobody came. The only person who came on the 27th it was a
reporter from the City Press, Elias Maluleka and he told me that I should
buy the City Press the following day because Andrew's story will appear
in that paper.

DR BORAINE: To make absolutely sure that I understand, you had no
official confirmation ...(tape ends)... find out more about this and
obviously we will, I just want to make one short comment for the record
Mr Chairperson. It was mentioned by my colleague that in your statement
there is reference to Andrew being an informer. There is no such
reference in your statement that is before us, and I think in fairness to
you and your family I should make that public. Thank you.

CHAIRMAN: Yasmin Sooka?

MS SOOKA: I would just like to ask you three questions please. The one is
you have told us that you went to the police at Mamelodi to open up a
docket. Can you tell me if the police actually opened that up because you
seem not to have been very clear there, can you just clarify that for me
please?

MS MAKOPE: When I went to lay charges I received Phuta in the office and
I laid of kidnapping because we already had information how he was picked
up. I was explaining to Phuta how he didn't come home the previous day,
how he told us that he was going to the doctor, while taking the
statement I explained to him that this lady told them that they were
police and Freddy sent them to pick him up, and this policeman said to me
is it Andrew that works at the mortuary, can you please wait a minute he
will come tomorrow, I am not taking the statement anymore.

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	M MAKOPE

MS SOOKA: Thank you. And Queen Skosana, does she live in Mamelodi, that's
the first part, and the second one is did you ever see her after you went
and she was interviewed by the Compol police please?

MS MAKOPE: Queen is staying in Mamelodi, she is not far from us. After
she has been called in by the police I have never seen her again.

MS SOOKA: Freddy, when he came back from Botswana, did he ever tell you
that he knew anything about why Andrew had been taken and killed?

MS MAKOPE: No he didn't say anything.

MS SOOKA: It is Freddy who is running the business again?

MS MAKOPE: Yes.

CHAIRMAN: Russel Ally.

DR ALLY: Queen Skosana she was actually with your husband when he was
taken, is that correct?

MS MAKOPE: Yes they were together.

DR ALLY: And will she be able to identify anybody who - the people who
actually took your husband away, has she said that she knows, or that she
can identify these people?

MS MAKOPE: She said she doesn't know them. She cannot even identify them
because she wasn't clear whether they were policemen or whether they were
ANC members.

DR ALLY: Have you given an address to the Commission where she can be
contacted?

MS MAKOPE: I don't know the address, I can't remember it just from my
head.

DR ALLY: The combi that was used you said it was a well-known combi, did
anybody ever take registration number or can they describe it, the colour
or?

MS MAKOPE: Nobody can describe it, it's only Queen who

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	M MAKOPE

saw, it's Queen who can give us clear information. It was blue tinted
windows and the driver was a White person.

DR ALLY: Thank you.

CHAIRMAN: Yasmin.

MS SOOKA: You said that your eldest son was quite disturbed, could you
tell us a little more about that and whether he's receiving any treatment
for it.

MS MAKOPE: Yes the treatment is under-way. He is being treated now.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

DR MAGWAZA: I just want to make a follow-up on the question asked by
Yasmin. You mentioned that you are sick and that your in-laws have to
support you, can you tell us more about that?

MS MAKOPE: Since Andrew's disappearance I fell very ill and I was
diagnosed having a heart attack, ulcers, high blood pressure, in most
cases I just feel dizzy. Sometimes I would feel like running away. There
is not even one month that I stay without going to the doctor or the
hospital. I spent most of my time in the hospital. I couldn't spend any
time with my children. I would stay at home a week and then the next I'm
in the hospital. This is the situation until now.

CHAIRMAN: Hlengiwe Mkhize.

MS MKHIZE: I will just ask one more question, and I can see you're
getting exhausted in talking about the most difficult experience in your
life. Partly as a Commission we have a responsibility to think about what
needs to be done to promote healing and reconciliation. The question of
the disappearances is the difficult one. I wonder whether you can share
with us your vision as to what is it that the

JOHANNESBURG HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	12	M MAKOPE

Commission can do for those individuals and families who have people who
disappeared, any thoughts about what you think might heal, might begin to
heal those families?

MS MAKOPE: The most thing that will soothe me, that will be accepted by
my children as well, is only when they can get their father and he can be
buried dignified.

MS MKHIZE: Your view that if he can be buried, a person can be buried
like a person with dignity is appreciated. I don't know whether you had
finished what you were saying, thank you.

MS MAKOPE: There is one thing that I am requesting again, can Mamasela
appear before the Commission so that the two of us can sit down? So that
he can explain why did he kill Andrew, maybe I can be comforted. I am
referring to Mamasela.

MS MKHIZE: We thank you very much.

CHAIRMAN: We thank you very much. As we have been saying to other people
we ask God to really grace you. Your sorrows are our sorrows as well. If
we say we feel the same pain you felt one would think it's a joke. People
around here and those who are not here when they hear these stories they
will open their hearts as you have done today. We are grateful, your
heart will be open, the oil will be poured in and you will be soothed. We
really feel the same way as you feel. Let God Bless you.

	We are suggesting that we do not take the tea break here. We have just
one more witness. It may be better that we take the last witness and then
adjourn until Thursday.

	-------------------

