
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 28.11.96		NAME: ZANELA MALATSE

CASE: TEMBISA - DAY 3

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We have two final witnesses to call for today's session. I'd
like now to call Zanele Malatse to come forward please. Thank you very
much for coming and thank you also for waiting so long, it's been a long
day. Before you give your evidence I'd like you to swear that the
evidence you give this afternoon will be the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth.

ZANELE MALATSE: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: I will ask Hlengiwe Mkhize to lead your evidence, thank you.

MS MKHIZE: We welcome you Zanele and we thank you for your patience to
wait till this hour. We appreciate it very much. Can you tell us briefly
about Tidiso, about his childhood at that age of 15?

MRS MALATSE: I came with Tidiso Insufeni at a very young age Tafeni. When
he was a young man that's when he was attacked by Inkatha.

MS MKHIZE: At the time of this incident was he still a student and how
old was he? He was a student in Figrene High School, he was doing
standard five, he was fifteen years old when this happened, this attack
by Inkatha.

MS MKHIZE: The time he was attacked, were they specifically targeting at
him or was it a random attack?

MRS MALATSE: We heard these gunshots at about four o'clock here in the
community but we didn't bother ourselves but at about twenty past six we
all went out in the section, we TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	MALATSE

wanted to see what was happening. When we went out to come out of the
gate, that's when they told me that they have hit my son at that time. I
was running up and about, I was brave, I was running behind the car that
was trying to take him to the hospital but I couldn't make it to the
hospital.

	These people were being loaded on the Caspers, they were dressed in
municipality jackets, blue in colour, some women intervened and stopped
me and whilst we were sitting with these women, I saw the policemen
coming to my house and they told me that my son couldn't make it in
hospital and therefore he was taken to Rabasotho but he was chased away
from there and he was dropped at my doorstep.

	The policemen were guarding Inkatha but they didn't care about our sons.

	The community tried to collect all these corpses and take them to
Boksburg and thereafter they requested a blanket and put them in the
corner. Other than that there is nothing I can say.

MS MKHIZE: We thank you very much. You say this happened at four in the
morning?

MRS MALATSE: The first gunshots went off at that time up until we
realised what was happening, when they came near us and we realised who
they were.

MS MKHIZE: When these gunshots started, where was your son?

MRS MALATSE: We were sleeping. It was still dark at that time until about
twenty past six. They were shooting nearby and everyone and to go out and
see what was happening because it was already becoming lighter.

MS MKHIZE: What I'm trying to find out is, was he shot inside the house
or was he shot whilst he was outside?

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	MALATSE

MRS MALATSE: We were already outside, that is when these people came in a
hugh number and that is when they shot him and he lay down on the ground.

MS MKHIZE: You say at that time he was 15 years old.

MRS MALATSE: Yes.

MS MKHIZE: That time he was going outside to see what was happening, was
he alone or was he accompanied by others? Or was he with you, can you
tell us just to have a brief picture.

MRS MALATSE: At that time it was lighter and everybody was up. They
wanted to see what was happening outside. Unfortunately, when he tried to
appear, that is when those

people appeared in great numbers and they hit him but the other children
managed to run into the neighbours houses. i saw these children running,
even myself, they didn't manage to shoot me but the Casper was just
standing there.

MS MKHIZE: The people who saw him, can they say who shot him, what he was
dressed in?

MRS MALATSE: They said he was ...(indistinct) by a man who was dressed in
a police coat. I saw the policemen and they were even jumping the fences
in our yard and we were helpless as women because they didn't want men.
It was women who were all over the street.

MS MKHIZE: You saw a man dressed in a coat who took out a gun?

MRS MALATSE: They came armed already, they were carrying their guns and
they would shoot anyone dressed in pants, except for women. When I saw my
son lying on the ground I decided to run in his direction and I didn't
fear death on that day.

MS MKHIZE: When you found him, where was he shot?

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	MALATSE

MRS MALATSE: He was shot behind the ear and underneath his left arm, just
underneath the shoulder.

MS MKHIZE: Did anyone take the car registration or did you lay a charge
regarding this?

MRS MALATSE: People who were having these details were the community of
Tefane because I saw it as a waste of time to go to the police because
they were just standing by and watching whilst we were being killed. I
didn't see the need to go and report this.

MS MKHIZE: Did they ever come after this to inform you whether there was
a case or an inquest.

MRS MALATSE: No they never did till today.

MS MKHIZE: I thank you very much. I'll take you back to the chairperson,
Mr Hugh Lewin.

CHAIRPERSON: Joyce do you have any questions? Thank you Hlengiwe. Mrs
Malatse, if I could just confirm, if you could give us details about the
rest of your family.

MRS MALATSE: I don't know how detailed must I say, can you just explain
your question?

CHAIRPERSON: Immediate family and your children.

MRS MALATSE: I had three children. The first born is 22 and the second
born is the deceased and the last one is 14 years old. It's a boy. I've
got only two children now.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, and you are from Mtafene Section?

MRS MALATSE: Yes Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Again we're very grateful to you for coming to give us this
information and telling us this horrible story. As I said before, we wish
we could offer more comfort but there's nothing we can do to bring your
child back. What we will do is to try and find out as much as possible
about what actually happened, why it happened, TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	MALATSE

because that must be part of your pain, the continuation of not actually
knowing the reason for this. And what we hope is that in bringing out
this information, through bringing all the details about what happened in
those very recent years, yes it will never happen again, yes the future
will be better for all of us, and we would like to thank you for helping
by coming forward with these details for contributing, for making your
statement and for setting an example for other people in that way. Thank
you very much.

	----------------------







