	1	N M MALOBOLA


	1	N M MALOBOLA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.08.1996	NAME:	NAMPUNDING MABEL MALOBOLA

CASE:	JB00169	-	PRETORIA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: Welcome and I want to make absolutely sure that you can hear
me through the headphones. Can you hear me alright?

MRS MALOBOLA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Good. It is nice to see a smile. Mrs Malobola, you are one of
many people who were involved in the KwaNdebele massacre where many, many
people lost their lives and one of them was your grandson and you have
come to tell us your story today. Your heart must be full of pain as you
relive those times, but I want you to know that you are amongst friends.
We are not here to cross-examine you, we are here to share with you in
your pain. Could you please stand to take the oath?

NAMPUNDING MABEL MALOBOLA: (Duly sworn in, states).

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Please be seated and make yourself
comfortable. My colleague, Mr Wynand Malan, is going to assist you to
tell your story, but before I ask him could you please tell us who is
with you today?

MRS MALOBOLA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Who is sitting next to you?

MRS MALOBOLA: She is my sister.

DR BORAINE: She is your sister?

MRS MALOBOLA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: I would want to welcome her too and thank her

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	N M MALOBOLA

very much for coming and being with you. Thank you.

MR MALAN: Mrs Malobola, if you will just excuse me to just make an
announcement. We have now also in translation service into Afrikaans
available which you will get on channel one on your headphone sets. Those
of you who would be interested in listening to the translation through
medium Afrikaans.

	Mrs Malobola, thank you very much for being here. You gave us a written
statement. From your statement it is clear you also visited the mortuary,
the Government Mortuary.

MRS MALOBOLA: Yes.

MR MALAN: And that is the information, mainly, that you give us, as to
what you found there and it relates to the same incident that we have
just heard other witnesses on. We will appreciative if you could tell us
your story.

MRS MALOBOLA: I greet you all. I am happy to be here at this time even
though my heart is sore because what I experienced was not supposed to be
experienced by living people. It was on Tuesday, these children came to
my house on Wednesday. They were from Springs. They visited me because it
was during school vacations. I stayed with them from Wednesday, Thursday
until Friday. That is when a man who worked in Harmanskraal came to our
house. They were very happy together with their grandfather. Everything
was fine. We slept on Friday.

	On Saturday we woke up. It was also a good company with them. It was a
group of young boys. I could not understand why are they in a group. Then
their grandfather said it is just small boys together. We were seated on
the lawn at the front part of the yard. At four o' clock the

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	N M MALOBOLA

grandfather said, Mbuzo, make fire so that we can get inside the house.
Then he did so, started chopping wood and then made fire, but he was in a
hurry and I could not understand why. It was like he was happy, but these
boys were on their way. We could not understand what was actually
happening. When we got inside the house these boys did not get inside the
house. Then I was left with them outside. I could not understand what was
happening then. However, during sunset they did not arrive at all. We
started asking their company around Mamelodi, asking ourselves where they
went, but I could understand they were with my sister's children. They
were in a group here. We were seated on the rockery outside in my yard.
Then we slept. On Sunday morning we woke up. The children were still not
home. I could not even attend Church. On Monday, Tuesday until Thursday
we could not see the children at home.

	The following week on Tuesday Johannah's cousin in a combi arrived at
home. Said there were children who visited here and then I asked her
where are they. He said, Mama, I am sorry, the children have passed away.
Then I asked why? He said they were killed at Johannah's place. Then I
got disturbed. I woke up, I dressed, I went to my sister's place. I asked
her did you hear about what happened? She said, yes and I asked her what
are you going to do because we do not know KwaNdebele. Botiki who is
Johanna's, Botiki Nkosi, said no Mama, I will take you there. He took us
to Johannah's place. When we arrived we found that they have already
swept the place clean. There was nothing to be found there. Myself and my
grandfather plucked out the spikes from wall. I did not have that idea to
take these nails from the wall and put them in my handkerchief, you

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	N M MALOBOLA

know, wrap them in my handkerchief and take them along with me. We went
outside to meet Johannah. She was together with some women who were busy
sweeping and cleaning the floors. I asked her how did these children die,
what happened? She said I do not know what happened. I said to her if you
say you do not know at the moment, but some time, one day, you will know.

	We went back to the combi. Now we asked her where are the corpses that
you called us for. She said they are at the mortuary at Bronkhorstspruit.
We went ... the place was full of bones. You could not identify anyone.
All of them were burnt. It was ashes around, bones. Some of them did not
have arms, some of them did not have hands, some of them did not have
legs, they were shot, did not have eyes. They had nothing. We buried a
corpse that did not have a head. You could just see the top part of the
skull. You could not tell or recognise the person whom you were burying.

MR MALAN: Mama, is that your story? Is there anything you want to add?

MRS MALOBOLA: I do not hear.

MR MALAN: Sorry, my question was whether you have given us the story that
you want to tell us? Is there anything you want to add?

MRS MALOBOLA: Yes, there is because this is quite a long time. This year
is 11 years now and I am a person that is sick. I have got sugar
diabetes. I have been in the hospital last week. I was sleeping there. So
some of the things when I have forgotten, please remind me because some
of the things, they are out of my head.

MR MALAN: Thank you very much Mama. We, you were here when we listened to
the other witnesses.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	N M MALOBOLA

MRS MALOBOLA: Yes Sir.

MR MALAN: So we had a lot of information. We have your additions to the
incident. Especially your personal visit and the description of what you
saw there. I have no further questions and I am handing you back to the
Archbishop, as Chairperson, to deal with the rest. Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you. Any questions? Tom Manthata.

MR MANTHATA: When you arrived at Sis Johannah, you arrived there and you
found some of them. Were they happy?

MRS MALOBOLA: Yes, you could not see whether they were happy or were they
sad.

MR MANTHATA: As you suspected that Johannah did such a deed could you
meet as parents of these children who died after the incident?

MRS MALOBOLA: No, no. What happened was just shoved under the mattress.
No policemen arrived. I asked her did you report this to the police, but
nothing happened as I understand. This, the deceased's parents arrived
from Springs. They wanted to speak to Johannah, but they could not meet
Johannah. Even if when the police from KwaNdebele arrived they let them
sit in the police station until four o' clock. They never asked them
questions until they went back to Springs.

MR MANTHATA: I thank you Mam.

CHAIRPERSON: Any further questions? Russell Ally.

DR ALLY: Mama, can you tell us a little bit about your grandson Mbuzo?
How old was he and how was he involved politically, if you do know this?

MRS MALOBOLA: I do not understand. Mbuzo use to hang around with them. He
was about 19 years old. He was in the PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	N M MALOBOLA

company of three boys. One was from Mahlangu's family in Benoni. The
other one was from Vosloorus with him. The other one I could not remember
his name, but the other one was Kenny Mahlangu from Benoni.

DR ALLY: Was Mbuzo still at school or had he finished school?

MRS MALOBOLA: I cannot say he was finished or he was not finished because
he was staying with his mother and father in Springs. They were just
coming to visit for me.

DR ALLY: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: We do not have comforting words that we can pass to you. We
understand the hurt that you experienced. We pray God Almighty that He
may bless you and let it be Him who will be gracious to you together with
everybody who is here and a lot of them who are not here who will
sympathise with you and comfort you. We are prepared to investigate and
find the true facts so that you could know who did these brutal things so
that even people who suspected each other, thinking maybe it was so and
so who did this, could not be misjudged as to being people who did the
thing which is so brutal. We thank you for having come forward to tell
the tale in public. I hope this will help you to be comforted because you
know there are people who sympathise with you and we thank you for that.

	Just before I pass on to Dr Boraine, could we make a small appeal. We do
not, in fact, have enough of these headsets we have been talking about
and many of us ...

	------------------------------







PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

