
	1

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		29.10.96		ALEXANDRA

NAME:		KENNETH MANANA

MS MKHIZE: Kenneth, we would like to welcome you. I would also like to
thank you for having been patient with us. We would like to thank you for
that. Can you tell us who is sitting beside you.

MR MANANA: It is my father.

MS MKHIZE: We would also like to welcome Mr Manana for coming together
with your son to give him the courage and strength. Now I would like to
ask you Kenneth to stand on your feet while you take oath.

KENNETH MANANA (s.s.)

MS MKHIZE: As usual one of us will help you in leading evidence and I
would like to ask Mr Manthata to.

MR MANTHATA: Mr Manana, please relax, you and Kenneth so that you should
be able to tell us what you are going to ask us about. Can you tell us in
short what Kenny is doing, your history.

MR MANANA: I am Kenneth Manana. In 1986 I was involved in the struggle of
the PAC. I will say that we were under the APLA organisation. We were
sort of reacting as to what was happening to the community and also the
children. We were involved in operation exactly attacking the government
forces. We had two ways which we used in fighting back against these
forces. When we had problems financially we would go to white people to
get sponsors and firearms. At the present moment I am working. I am
working at Queue. I

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	MANANA

am also saved, I am a Christian and I was so happy to get a subpoena to
come before the Commission and explain as to what have happened to my
friends and others. From the time we were detained after we robbed some
premises at Savoy there were some people from Soweto and others were from
Alexandra. So they have to drop me on the way to come back to Alexandra
and then (indistinct) Soweto. When they let me off the car they didn't
realise unfortunately that there were a car coming behind us which have
seen us while committing the robbery. They found me while I was on the
way to come to Alexandra so they shot me on my left thigh and also the
right thigh. Therefore I collapsed. They came towards me shooting at me,
hitting me. They took me to Bramley police station. That is where they
started calling the Brixton Murder and Robbery Squad, explaining that
they are suspecting me as being a member of the gang called Scorpions.
Those people who went in for the Scorpion gang they were also wanted by
the police so there were pamphlets distributed. They took me to hospital.
While in hospital I stayed there until the following day. They had to
take me for an operation on that day. The police arrived, they took me
and they told the nurses that they are transferring me to another
hospital. Unfortunately that wasn't true because they were not going to
do that. They took all the files from the hospitals, they took me to the
Brixton police station. I was still suffering from the wounds and I also
had one bullet in my body. They started interrogating me about the
activities within the community, asking me about arms and many other
things and they started also torturing me. They took me to the second
floor, they let me sit down on a chair and tied me on the chair, I
couldn't do anything

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	MANANA

nor move. They electrocuted me on my private parts and also on my hands.
They also tied my face with a sack, also poured me with water, continued
to electrocute me. They said that I knew about arms in Alexandra, they
said they would leave me and let me go back to the cells. On the
following day in the morning they called me back and they said that they
found the car that we were travelling in and the people who were in it
and they killed them. When I enquired further they told me that they
found them, they were only away and they said they were attacking them
while they were travelling in the air with a helicopter. On the third day
I had to go to court and the charges were read out. From then I was taken
back to Sun City. I told them about my problems that there was a bullet
in my body and asked them if they can take me to hospital outside where I
can get help. I continued with the trial and the bullet was still in my
body and I was sentenced to ten years but I only served four years. While
I was in prison I also tried to ask them to get me to hospital where they
can extract the bullet out of my body. I served the four years and I was
released. I was released in 1991. After my release I tried to look for a
doctor who can help me. I found one who said to me if I had a medical aid
he was going to take me, refer me to hospital to see if the bullet even
caused any damage in my body. But unfortunately I didn't have any medical
aids so even today I still have the bullet in my body. About those who
died I don't know how they were killed but I was told that they were
killed by a helicopter. That was rumours, I didn't know much about it.
But what I saw in the paper was that I was also among those who were shot
by these people in the helicopter. Unfortunately I was arrested the

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	MANANA

day before these people were killed.

MR MANTHATA: Kenny please forgive me, I will try to find out as to your
arrest. Was it to do with your robbery at Savoy?

MR MANANA: I would say it was connected with that matter.

MR MANTHATA: Because the others were killed there was no one who
witnessed that your issue was political.

MR MANANA: Are you asking about the media or what?

MR MANTHATA: I am not talking about the media. I am saying you yourself
you appeared in court. When you got in court you were charged for Savoy.
Your case wasn't married with the issue of APLA.

MR MANANA: In court they never enquired anything about the involvements
of APLA. What they have asked it was about firearms and they generalised
the whole issue saying it was ammunitions. They said they found the guns
and they were illegal in South Africa. They generalised the whole case
and saying it is ammunition. They didn't specify what we did with
firearms.

MR MANTHATA: What I want to find out is whether you were sure that there
wasn't anyone, we know that you were an APLA member, that all that you
were doing you were involved in politics and did you only (indistinct) a
story. I would say that up to the time when the case came to an end you
were the only person who knew that you were an APLA member. Your
involvement or your contact with police, it wasn't anything connected
with politics. It was only the robbery issue which came into the focus.

MR MANANA: I would say that the police knew about the issues of guns.
While they were investigating they also assured me - they were telling us
that the particular

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	MANANA

organisations they were using these arms in their struggle. Police knew
that but in court they used it - they called it as a criminal case.

MR MANTHATA: You as people, did you have the arms?

MR MANANA: Yes, we did have the arms.

MR MANTHATA: And where did you use them?

MR MANANA: I would say we used them, they were used in Alexandra and the
other surrounding areas.

MR MANTHATA: When you say they were used in Alexandra were they used in
the police station or the councillors? Where?

MR MANANA: I would say that from my knowledge there were groups within
the community who were doing the operations. Well I know that we also had
to work with the soldiers.

MS MKHIZE: We thank you very much. I will ask the other members of the
panel to ask questions to further clarify your matter.

MS SOOKA: Could you tell me besides the armed robbery that you were
involved in, did you deal in arms, was that part of what APLA was doing
at the time?

MR MANANA: Yes, I was in one operation here in Alexandra.

MS SOOKA: So this was just one of many?

MR MANANA: Yes, according to the reports which we had from the papers
because we were sort of different groups and then (indistinct) this
machine and all this.

MS SOOKA: What were the charges that were brought against you when you
appeared in court?

MR MANANA: Yes, it was the robbery and then the ammunition that I have
just explained to you.

MS SOOKA: Were you defended by an attorney?

MR MANANA: Yes, I had a lawyer but it was just from the Legal Aid because
when I was arrested then I didn't have any

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	MANANA

contact for contacting about going on with lawyers and all this, I was
just separated.

MS SOOKA: Was it part of your defence that you were a member of APLA and
that the robbery had been in pursuance of a political aim? Was that
evidence ever led by you in the court case?

MR MANANA: No, the case was just rooted in a criminal act. There was no -
any political involvement in the court.

MS SOOKA: Was that your choice or your lawyer's choice?

MR MANANA: For the case to be held in that way?

No, it was not my choice but the way the police were presenting the
matter then which means that they didn't find any political evidence in
representing the case but the only evidence was only in the criminal act
where I could be charged.

MS SOOKA: And you say that you served four years in jail. Was that
because you were paroled early or were you given an indemnity?

MR MANANA: It was in 1991 when there was amnesty for all prisoners. Then
I was also involved in that amnesty.

MS SOOKA: So you actually got the amnesty for political offences then?

MR MANANA: No, during that time it was just general, even the political
were released.

MS SOOKA: Oh, okay. I remember that. Ja. Who were the other people who
were in that vehicle with you?

MR MANANA: Their names? It was Barnard, Sepho and Nel.

MS SOOKA: Were you one cell?

MR MANANA: I beg your pardon?

MS SOOKA: Were you one group together?

MR MANANA: Yes, we were in one group.

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	MANANA

MS SOOKA: You see this committee deals basically with human rights
violations cases. And I think one of the things that we would like to
know is what is the human rights violation that you are complaining about
to this committee.

MR MANANA: Okay. To this committee I am complaining about that while I
was in hospital then in a queue for taking out the bullet in an operation
and then I was taken as if I am transferred to another hospital, yet I
was not transferred to another hospital. Then I was also sent to the
Brixton police station to be tortured on top of the pain of the bullet.
And the bullet is still in me. Even while I was in prison I tried to ask
them, they say no for the sentence that I am doing is very long and then
when they take me out to an outside hospital I will escape.

MS SOOKA: Were the Brixton police aware of the fact that you were a
member of APLA?

MR MANANA: Yes, they were aware. After they found the guns and all of
these things, the ammunition.

MS SOOKA: How old were you at the time when you were in fact imprisoned?

MR MANANA: Okay, when I was sentenced I was at the age of 18.

MS SOOKA: Also what were the other kind of activities that you were
involved in here in Alexandra as APLA?

MR MANANA: I think the one that I have mentioned are the only activities.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. I don't have further questions.

MS MKHIZE: I have one question for you. You talked about Scorpion gang.
Which gang is it, is it a known gang here in Alexandra? How did it
function?

MR MANANA: The police were looking for the particular gun

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	MANANA

that was used in some incidents reported in this area. I would say that
even many people in Alexandra they happen to know about this issue
because it was distributed on papers saying that they were looking for
someone with the Scorpio scars.

MS MKHIZE: A small question. I don't remember well if you have clarified
that before. Can you briefly explain to us that when you say you were an
APLA member things like criminal acts were then allowed by APLA policies.

MR MANANA: I will say no because our policies were on the line of the
struggle against the government at the time. At that time the only thing
we could do was just to get to help, was to use criminal acts. We used it
as a discretion. MS MKHIZE: From the beginning you said you a person you
have changed or repented. When you say that why do you think it is
necessary to mention that?

MR MANANA: This was mentioned to show that in all that had happened I now
realise that some of those things were mistakes and that those people who
do something bad to me at the present moment that think I do have a heart
to receive them and forgive them. Just to show before the Commission that
I do have that heart to forgive.

MS MKHIZE: That repentant heart of yours, if there other things that you
have done while you were an APLA member, something that was against the
law, will you be prepared as a changed person to go before the amnesty
committee to ask for forgiveness?

MR MANANA: I will say since I was charged for the criminal act that I
have committed the case is over.

MS MKHIZE: I am saying this because as you are sitting here there are
some people who wants to know about the truth as

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	9	MANANA

to what has happened to their relatives saying that they will never be
able to forgive unless they find out the truth. That is why when we find
people like you who have changed, we like to encourage them to come
before the amnesty committee to give the whole truth as to what they know
and also as to things that they have done to make sure that people who
were affected by these criminal acts could find a chance to forgive
because it is so difficult for them to forgive if they haven't got the
truth.

MR MANANA: As I have already stated, we were in group formations. In my
own group the only thing that I have done which was wrong was the
robbery, for which I was arrested and convicted and sentenced. But if
there are some other people who might have done something bad I might go
to them and tell them to come before the amnesty committee.

MS MKHIZE: We would like to thank you for having been able to come. We
also thank you for having started a new life. Also being ready to
reconcile and forgive. As you have already said that you are a new man,
you have repented. We pity you for having suffered under the hands of the
police. We also believe that you work with us to add any information that
we might need in your statement. Thank you very much.

	-------------------

