
	1	M MANZIYA 

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 28.8.96 NAME: MIRRIAM NOMULELO MANZIYA

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We would like to call upon Mirriam Nomulelo Manziya as our
next witness.

MIRRIAM NOMULELO MANZIYA: (sworn states)

REV XUNDU: Let me greet you, Ms Manziya. Once more, I would like to
confirm your names, are your names, Mirriam Nomulelo Manziya?

MS MANZIYA: Yes, that is right.

REV XUNDU: So these are your full names?

MS MANZIYA: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Looking at the statement you made here in front of me, you
have come to appear here on behalf of your son, by the name of Mthuzimele
Phillip Manziya?

MS MANZIYA: Yes, that is right.

REV XUNDU: You said that he was murdered on the 27 December 1989?

MS MANZIYA: I last saw him on the 27 December 1989, that is when he went
out of the house and on the 28th, police arrived at my home to inform me
that Mthuzimele had been murdered by the Ama-Afrika and taken to hospital
in an ambulance.

REV XUNDU: How old was Mthuzimele at the time, can you still remember?

MS MANZIYA: He was born in 1953.

REV XUNDU: Was he still at school, or was he working?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	M MANZIYA

MS MANZIYA: He was a worker at the time.

REV XUNDU: Now, let's go back to your statement. Now, you said he left
home because he was going to look after the initiates?

MS MANZIYA: Yes, it was after supper, and he said he was going to sleep,
then I asked him that I wanted to prepare breakfast for him so that he
should take it with him, then he said, no, there is some unrest outside
because the Ama-Afika and the AZAPO's are killing everyone outside and I
asked him to sleep and then he refused because he said they were looking
after the initiates because the AZAPO's wanted to attack the initiates.

REV XUNDU: Was there any initiates that had been attacked at the time?

MS MANZIYA: No, not yet, it is only that they wanted to keep guard before
they could be attacked.

REV XUNDU: These policemen who arrived in your house to inform you that
your son had been killed, can you recall their names?

MS MANZIYA: They were unknown to me, it was the first time for me to see
them.

REV XUNDU: You said who actually had killed Mthuzimele.

MS MANZIYA: They said that he had been hacked by Ama-Afrika.

REV XUNDU: Did you perhaps inquire who the Ama-Afrika people were?

MS MANZIYA: No, I could not speak any further with them because we were
shocked. All we did was we went to the provincial hospital by taxi and my
children left me behind and I followed and when we got there, I saw my
children carrying his clothes because he had been transferred to the

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	M MANZIYA

Livingstone hospital and they discouraged me that I shouldn't go to the
hospital but I insisted and that was the time that the ambulance was
pulling out for the Livingstone hospital and my children were very happy
because he was in a very bad condition because his body had been stuffed
into a plastic bag.

	I then went to Port Elizabeth and I arrived there before the arrival of
the ambulance and I had to wait and then I was called, so when I saw him,
he couldn't look, he couldn't speak, he was just quiet.

REV XUNDU: At the time the policemen came to your home to inform you that
the Ama-Afrika had killed your son, did you actually understand what they
meant by Ama-Afrika?

MS MANZIYA: We heard about Ama-Afrika as the Ama-Azapo, we didn't
actually know what that was.

REV XUNDU: Now, let's go back to the time when you were in hospital. What
was happening there, and who was there?

MS MANZIYA: When I got there, he was placed in a corridor, he was lying
there, he couldn't see me, he couldn't look.

REV XUNDU: Was he dead at the time?

MS MANZIYA: No, he was still alive. On the 28 December 1989, on a
Thursday, I went home, leaving him there, and then I went back to the
hospital on the 29th, and I could see he was able to look, but he
wouldn't recognise me. I talked to him, but he couldn't respond so I left
him on that day.

	The following day on the 30th, I again visited the hospital, and I could
see he was making an attempt to speak but there was no voice because
teargas had been administered to them and his eyes were bloodshot, and
then when I went on Sunday, it was then that I got the news that he was
dead.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	M MANZIYA

REV XUNDU: When you were visiting him, did he perhaps have any wounds on
his body?

MS MANZIYA: Yes, he had, because on Saturday, on the 30th, as I was
standing next to him and looking at him with all the sympathy, he could
hear me, but he could not respond, then he lifted one hand, he again
lifted one foot, trying to show to me that he was not paralysed and then
he turned around and that is when I noticed five wounds at the back and
he also had one wound on the head where he had been hit, but the nurses
wouldn't like me to observe.

REV XUNDU: All the wounds, were they at the back?

MS MANZIYA: Yes, they were, it was as if he had been lying on his stomach
when they were hacking him.

REV XUNDU: Now you mean those people who had hacked and stabbing him,
were they intending on killing him?

MS MANZIYA: Yes, they were, because he had two wounds down the lower
body, and in the middle he had another wound and then he had a very bad
gash on his head.

REV XUNDU: At the time he was buried, was the funeral conducted at home?

MS MANZIYA: No, he was buried by the ANC.

REV XUNDU: In your statement you said that is was a mass funeral with 9
others, but there were 13 who died in all, and 3 bodies were hidden
somewhere and only 9 could be discovered, and the funeral was conducted
on the 13th and then the other 4 that had previously been hidden was
buried the following day. Who was the murderer of all these people?

MS MANZIYA: They were together in all this incident.

REV XUNDU: Were they murdered by the same people who had killed your so?.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	5	M MANZIYA

MS MANZIYA: Yes, they had been killed there in Khayelitsha.

REV XUNDU: According to what you heard, what are the full details about
this attack?

MS MANZIYA: They say the Ama-Afrika were in ambush and they chased them
and then a casper came and teargas was administered and they were pushed
towards the direction of the Ama-Afrika.

REV XUNDU: Now you say, what you gather is that they were chased by the
casper?

MS MANZIYA: Yes, the hippo came from the direction of the town and
administered teargas, pushing them towards the direction of the
Ama-Afrika, so that they were not in a position to run away, that is when
the Ama-Afrika got an opportunity to hack and attack them.

REV XUNDU: Is that all you have to say, before I ask you what your
requests and wishes are?

MS MANZIYA: I would say that is the only explanation I have because my
evidence is based on hearsay.

REV XUNDU: What are your wishes?

MS MANZIYA: My pain is that my son had a child who is still of school
going age, attending Std.7 and he is a boy. His wish is that he should be
helped to further his education because he is still interested.

REV XUNDU: In your statement you say how is your sleep?

MS MANZIYA: I don't enjoy good health, such that even last time I had to
consult a doctor last week. I was having sleepless nights.

REV XUNDU: Now, is that all you would like to say to us, or is there any
other information you would like to give to this Commission? If there is
anything that you have forgotten at this moment?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	6	M MANZIYA

MS MANZIYA: Yes, I have a request, that the Commission could do something
for me because the one who died was the one who was taking care of us.
Now that he is gone, there is no one who is of assistance to me. Thank
you.

REV XUNDU: Thank you Ms Manziya, I now hand over to the Chairperson to
see if there are any more questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Ms Manziya.

------------------------

