
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	12 JUNE 1997	

NAME:	NOSIPHO BLOSSOM MARWEZU

CASE:		EC0113/96ELN	-	MDANTSANE

DAY:		4

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------

CHAIRPERSON: If we could change our order. If Nosipho Blossom Marwezu,

number 12, could come forward please. Nosipho, please stand up to be
sworn in.

NOSIPHO BLOSSOM MARWEZU: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: We just want to clarify that the reason we called you, it is
because

there is an attorney, a legal representative of an alleged perpetrator.
We had given him

a notice. So I am going to ask you questions. The story you are about
today is about

yourself, what happened to you on the 18th of June 1986. Is that so?

MRS MARWEZU: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: You were seven months pregnant at that time, arrested,
tortured.

Could you tell us what was happening at this time.

MRS MARWEZU: Should I start with my arrest?

CHAIRPERSON: Just before you got arrested. Why were you arrested?

MRS MARWEZU: In 1985 I was a student at Qaqamba doing my standard nine.

There were riots at Duncan Village. The police then would regularly come
to my

home looking for me. I got a message that the police are looking for me.
I left and

stayed at Mdantsane, NU15, with my sister. My mother said that I must
just go and

surrender to the police, because she could not sleep, the police were
regularly there.

They were going to arrest her if I did not give myself up to the police.
I then said I

would go to the Cambridge Police Station.

	Heather, my sister, said that I should go to Cape Town to my eldest
sister. I

truly went to Cape Town. I stayed there in 1985. In 1986, May, I came
back. I

thought that, perhaps, everything had subsided. On the 18th of June I was
at home

sleeping. There was a knock at the door. It is the police. It was at
about one or two

a.m. My mother opened the door. When they got in they did not say
anything to my

mother. They were with a policeman who knows me, Mandisi Mbewana. They
could

not see me, because I had covered myself. They said to my mother that
they are going

to arrest her if they cannot find me. They then took me. However, they
took my two

other brothers as well, Thembinkosi and Mbuyiseli, who is late.

	I was in pyjamas. They did not even let me change. When I got outside I
saw

a caspar. They put me into that caspar. It was packed with people. They
were

probably going around collecting people. They took us to a place called
Strongpoint

where the soldiers are in Duncan Village. The next morning we were taken
to

Cambridge. The Captain asked what the charges were. This man then
responded in

saying that he does not know. He was just given a list to arrest all the
people. Mr

Mbewana came saying that he wants all of us at Westbank. Then there was a
State of

Emergency. We were taken to Westbank.

CHAIRPERSON: Is this Mandisi Mbewana or the elder one?

MRS MARWEZU: Mandisi is the younger one who arrested me. The one who said

we must go to Westbank is the elder one. We could not even get visitors
for two

months. They had arrested me, I was in pyjamas. I was using the clothes
that they

provided me in prison. I was three months pregnant. Then the
interrogation started.

They took us one by one to Cambridge. They asked me if I knew that COSAS
had

been banned. I said yes. So they asked me why I worked for COSAS even
though it

had been banned. I said I did no such. They then said that I was a member
at, of

COSAS at Qaqamba. They asked if I know that the riots at Duncan Village
were all

inspired by Qaqamba students. They asked who had burnt down a policeman's
house.

I said I did not know.

	They took me back to the cell. They called me back. I did not know I was

going to go there. I was going to Frere Hospital regularly at that time.
They said that

I am supposed to go to the Frere Hospital. I told them that I had no
appointment

there. Nomsa's attorney, a co-prisoner, gave me her headscarf to put on.
I put it on.

They took me to Cambridge to an office there. Mr Mpumelelo Madliwa was
there

and Mpumelelo Nkonzombi. They asked me who had burnt down his house. I
said I

do not know. They strangled me. They pulled down my headscarf, put it
around my

neck. The one pulled from the left and the other from the right. I lost
all strength. I

urinated on myself. I was pregnant at the time.

	They said I must tell the truth, who burnt the house down. I said it was
me.

Who else? I said by myself. They told me that I was lying. They put down
the

headscarf and they strangled me with their own hands. They were not
beating me up,

just strangling me. What happened is that my eyes went red. They then
took me to,

back to Westbank Prison. When I got there I was not taken to a cell where
the others

were. I was taken to solitary confinement. My eyes were red. I saw nobody
but the

police.

CHAIRPERSON: How long were you in prison by then?

MRS MARWEZU: It was around September.

CHAIRPERSON: You had been arrested in June?

MRS MARWEZU: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: You were on your own. What happened?

MRS MARWEZU: They would take me to the Frere Hospital at the clinic there

regularly. From solitary confinement they took me to Cambridge again. A
police car

came to fetch me. I got there. There were chairs outside. They made me
sit there for

such a long time that I thought they had forgotten about me. After a
while Mr

Mbewana said I must go into his office. He did not settle down, he just,
he was

walking in and out. A White policeman called Radue came. This man bowed
down,

took something from under the table then left. After a short while there
was a bang. I

did not know whether I was being shot. I did not know what was happening.
I just

fell down. After a long while I got up. I could see I was on my own. They
came

back. They asked what it was. I said I did not know.

CHAIRPERSON: So what was the bang?

MRS MARWEZU: I do not know even to this day.

CHAIRPERSON: So when you had gotten up this policeman, Glen Henry Radue,

was not there?

MRS MARWEZU: No.

CHAIRPERSON: How did you get released? How did that come about?

MRS MARWEZU: On the sixth of December, after the bang, I was taken back to

prison. It happened that in my being shocked I started hurting,
contractions. I was

then taken to hospital. I gave birth to a premature child at seven
months. There was a

policeman at my side all the time. I got out, back to the prison with my
child,

Thinasonke. In the morning they went, when the police would come and
count us

they would take my child and bring the baby back late.

CHAIRPERSON: When did you go back to the cell?

MRS MARWEZU: After my child was five days old.

CHAIRPERSON: Where would you sleep at the cell?

MRS MARWEZU: On the floor.

CHAIRPERSON: With the baby?

MRS MARWEZU: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: After they had taken the child do you know who looked after
the

child, who fed the child?

MRS MARWEZU: No, when I would ask they would say that they would take the

child to the creche.

CHAIRPERSON: What happened eventually?

MRS MARWEZU: Until such time when they felt like releasing me they just
released

me.

CHAIRPERSON: What month was that?

MRS MARWEZU: It was in 1987. I cannot remember whether it was March or

April.

CHAIRPERSON: How old was the child?

MRS MARWEZU: Three months.

CHAIRPERSON: How old were you when this all happened?

MRS MARWEZU: I was 20 years of age in 1986.

CHAIRPERSON: Were you politically active at the time?

MRS MARWEZU: Yes, I was a COSAS member before COSAS was banned and

then after that it was banned.

CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, no charges were laid on you? That was the end of
your

harassment?

MRS MARWEZU: They put me into a car and took me to a taxi rank. They told
me

that the people that you had been arrested with were still in jail. I was
the only one

who had been released. If two people come to my house and you are the
third one.

CHAIRPERSON: Therefore that is a political meeting and they were going to

rearrest me.

MRS MARWEZU: No, not my family members, but visitors. I would have to get

one visitor at a time. If it is two, more than one then it would be taken
as I am holding

a meeting.

CHAIRPERSON: Who would take you from Cambridge?

MRS MARWEZU: There was a policeman called Solly. I do not know whether
that

is his first name or his last name.

CHAIRPERSON: He would just drive you around to the places they took you
to. He

never did anything to you?

MRS MARWEZU: No, he did not.

CHAIRPERSON: Who beat you or harassed you?

MRS MARWEZU: Madliwa and Nkonzombi.

CHAIRPERSON: What is his first name?

MRS MARWEZU: Both their first names are Mpumelelo.

CHAIRPERSON: These are the people who were strangling you with a head
scarf?

MRS MARWEZU: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Did they do anything else to you?

MRS MARWEZU: No.

CHAIRPERSON: Therefore they have both strangled you and released you?

MRS MARWEZU: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Nosipho. Perhaps there are questions from my co-

panellists. Dr Magwaza will ask just one question.

PROF MAGWAZA: Today the focus of our hearings is on how women were treated

and violated. In your case we have a typical case of a woman who was
violated not

only by torture, but who was also violated by just being a woman, a
woman. You say

your baby was taken away from you. You say that you were tortured when
you were

pregnant, you were strangled when you were pregnant. They were almost
strangling

two people not one person. How, what was your, what was the attitude of
your

torturers to you when you were pregnant? Did they say any nasty things to
you?

How did they treat you when you were actually pregnant, before you had
your baby?

MRS MARWEZU: Yes, first of all, when I was arrested Mpumelelo Madliwa did
not

know Nosipho Marwezu, myself. They asked if they had found Nosipho.
Mandisi

Mbewana then said here she is. Mpumelelo Madliwa then said we have wasted
a lot

of money, the Government's money has been wasted. They were using the

Government's money looking for me. He swore at me. When they were
strangling me

at Cambridge he swore at me yet again, saying I am a bitch, I am going to
tell the truth

whether I like it or not. I gave them the truth that was not really. I
said that because I

wanted them to lay charges on me, because I had had enough of being
imprisoned.

PROF MAGWAZA: So, what they said to you, something that would apply

specifically to a woman which they would not have said to a man, was that
they called

you a bitch? Is that what you are saying? If you were a man they would
not have said

that to you. Is it all they said to you, that is something they would
have said

specifically to a woman?

MRS MARWEZU: Well, they said much more, but I cannot repeat those swear

words.

PROF MAGWAZA: Okay, we respect that. Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: June Crichton has a few more questions for you.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you Madam Chair. I just have two questions for you for

clarification, Mrs Marwezu. The first one is did you know Nkonzombi or
Mbewana

before the arrest and the torture? Did you know them?

MRS MARWEZU: I knew him well. Mr Mbewana was my father's friend. He, we

were neighbours. My father called him uncle. I was born before him. I was
shocked

in the way he treated me.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you. My second question to you was did anybody assault

you in the presence of or with the help of Nkonzombi or Mbewana during
your

detention?

MRS MARWEZU: There were other policemen from Cambridge.

MS CRICHTON: Do you know who they were?

MRS MARWEZU: Nkonzombi and Madliwa, that is all I know. I do not know the

other peoples' names.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you. I hand over to you Madam Chair.

CHAIRPERSON: Nosipho, thank you so much for sharing your painful story
with us.

Perhaps some other people, especially people who are not women, they do
not know

the significance of giving birth to a child. I do not know how it would
be to give birth

to a child and have to keep that child in the first few months in prison.
Your story is

very painful especially because your baby would be taken from you for the
whole day.

Dr Magwaza has already said that some of us are not oppressed because we
are

human beings, just mere human beings, but because we are women, but, and
we, as

women, have suffered in a way that men, perhaps, can never understand and
I hope

that the men in this hall are listening so that this does not happen
again in future.

Thank you so much.

	------------------------------









	1	N B MARWEZU





MDANTSANE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

