
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 	21.05.97			

NAME: 	KHABONINA L MASILELA

CASE: 	JB 2113

PLACE: 	PIET RETIEF

DAY 1

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------

KHABONINA L MASILELA: (sworn states)

MR LEWIN: Mrs Masilela I'd like to thank you for coming and would like to
welcome you to this hearing. While you were travelling this morning we
did hear that there were some visitors from Germany but I don't think
they travelled from Germany today so I think you must be the only person
at this hearing who's actually travelled from another country. Because I
don't think that people realise that for you to get to this hearing today
you've actually travelled all the way through Swaziland. So we'd like to
thank you very much for making that effort and also to thank the person
who brought you here for bringing you here.

	You're going to be telling us about an incident that took place in
Boschfontein in 1986 and we'd just ask if you could please in your own
time, in your own words tell that story and also explain the context of
the stay-away and what happened to you. Thanks very much.

MRS MASILELA: In 1986 we had gathered in a ground as a community. We were
going to address a the president issue, President Mandela. As we were
there we saw the helicopter flying by and we were there. We stood up, it
was flying not too far away and it kept flying around us. Suddenly they
threw tear gas and we realised that we had water and as they threw that
tear gas we tried to help ourselves with this water we had and they
realised that we're not running away and started shooting. As they did
that I got injured on my left shoulder. I fell down and I was bleeding
profusely. I was taken to a combi and I was driven to hospital. When we
got there we were examined and given treatment. I felt so much pain and
asked about it as to how long will this pain last and they said no the
rubber bullet would melt. After that I won't feel any pain. And today I
still have problems with my left arm. I can't lift anything heavy at all.

	My arm is not functional, I can't do my own laundry. We moved and I was
not the only one, we were quite a number. We were discharged and we were
told to go back home from hospital and we did just exactly that.

	I tried when I got home to go to the chemist to enlist help which I got.
I will end here. That's exactly what happened on that day in 1986, what I
saw.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much Mrs Masilela. If I could just ask a few
questions to clear up some other questions that we might have. You talked
about the President Mandela issue. This was 1986 when he was still in
prison, he still had four years to come out of prison. Can you explain to
us what was happening? What was this issue that you were discussing at
the grounds?

MRS MASILELA: We were discussing about his coming, that we should see to
it that he is released because we are suffering. Because we thought that
his being released many things will fall into place and we'll get better.

MR LEWIN: So it was a protest meeting if you like for him to be released?

MRS MASILELA: That's correct.

MR LEWIN: You talked about the helicopter. Can you identify the
helicopter, was it a police helicopter, a defence force helicopter?

MRS MASILELA: It was a defence helicopter. It was a helicopter for the
Army.

MR LEWIN: An army helicopter. And you say they first threw tear gas and
then they started shooting. Did they carry out the shooting from the
helicopter? It didn't land at all.

MRS MASILELA: No it was flying just above us and they opened the door.

MR LEWIN: And you mention in your statement that they fired with rubber
bullets and bird shot.

MRS MASILELA: Correct.

MR LEWIN: What were you actually shot with? Rubber bullets

MRS MASILELA: They said so.

MR LEWIN: What was the effect on you, can you tell us. I mean fortunately
few of us who have actually been hit by ...(intervention).

MRS MASILELA: It was an excruciating pain because I got hit right above
my shoulder, my left arm on the shoulder.

MR LEWIN: And you said there was a lot of blood, did it break the skin?

MRS MASILELA: Yes.

MR LEWIN: But the bullet did that enter your body or not?

MRS MASILELA: Can you please repeat your question?

MR LEWIN: What happens to the rubber bullet when it's fired. Does it
actually go into your body or does it bounce off?

MRS MASILELA: They did not tell me at the hospital. They took me to the
X-Ray but never furnished information as far as that is concerned.

MR LEWIN: And you also mentioned that there were other people who were
injured in this incident. Can you give some idea of how many other people
were injured?

MRS MASILELA: The ones I saw on that day, it was Paulina Mkowchwa because
I was with her going to the hospital and Mandhla Nkhabela. We were
injured, and Lina Mkowchwa. Those are the ones I saw, and we were taken
into the combi and driven to the hospital.

MR LEWIN: Were they all from Boschfontein as well?

MRS MASILELA: That's correct.

MR LEWIN: Can you tell us a little bit about yourself please Mrs
Masilela, how do you live, do you work and how has that been affected
by...(intervention)

MRS MASILELA: I'm not working.

MR LEWIN: And how do you find the money to look after yourself and buy
the necessary?...(intervention)

MRS MASILELA: I don't have any source of income. My husband is on pension
now as well.

MR LEWIN: Do you have to get treatment still from the hospital?

MRS MASILELA: Not anymore.

MR LEWIN: Is there anything that you think can be done to help you and
the pain that you still have from your shoulder?

MRS MASILELA: Yes.

MR LEWIN: Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Manthata.

MR MANTHATA: Mrs Masilela had you ever heard about the organisation
Release Mandela Campaign? Sorry, have you understood my question?

MRS MASILELA: I heard but I don't understand, won't you please repeat the
question? We were just gathered as an ANC organisation but I have heard.

MR MANTHATA: At that gathering, who was addressing you? Or who was to
address you?

MRS MASILELA: It is Galela's son.

MR MANTHATA: Were there people in Boschfontein, who were political
prisoners at that time? Were there any political prisoners in that
community?

MRS MASILELA: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: How many were they?

MRS MASILELA: I don't remember the number.

MR MANTHATA: But do you still remember what they were arrested for?

MRS MASILELA: You mean the ones who were arrested ... (intervention).

MR MANTHATA: The ones who were in prison at that time? The people who
were in prison, that is the political prisoners in Boschfontein at the
time of that meeting.

MRS MASILELA: I don't remember but we used to gather, convene and discuss
as an ANC organisation, ANC members. About the ones who were in prison I
won't be able to say anything as far as that is concerned.

MR MANTHATA: Was that ANC or UDF organisation at the time?

MRS MASILELA: It was ANC.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you Mrs Masilela.

CHAIRPERSON: Mam just one question from me. What else was happening in
your community at the time? Were there any other conflicts taking place,
was there a move to oust councillors from the area, was there fighting
between the youth and police, what else was happening?

MRS MASILELA: There was violence and a conflict between the police and
the youth.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell us a little more about that?

MRS MASILELA: They arrived one day and took the youth to town and they
were kept there for quite some days and they were released and they came
back. They went to a different location this time now at night and took
the youth of that location and they went to a ground and the youth tried
to run away and they shot one of them.

CHAIRPERSON: Was that part of the protest on that day or was it just to
do with releasing Mandela?

MRS MASILELA: That happened before, They started collecting though.

CHAIRPERSON: You said earlier on that your shoulder has been damaged
because of the rubber bullet injury. What can you do with that arm, are
you able to lift your arm like that.

MRS MASILELA: It's painful. This other one is fine but the left arm is
painful.













CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything else you want to say before we finish?

MRS MASILELA: No, I just thank the Commission to afford me this
opportunity to come and relate also my story because I had a broken heart.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Masilela we have to express our thanks to you for coming
all this distance. My colleague tells me it's almost 500km away that you
travelled today. Thank you very much for coming to share this story with
us, we have heard your pain and we wish you a safe journey back to your
home. Thank you for coming.

	







