	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		24.07.1996	NAME:	ELIZA MASILWANE

CASE: DAY 3 			 SOWETO

____________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: What I would like to do now is call Eliza Masilwane. Could I
ask you just before I hand you over to Hlengiwe Mkhize, who will lead
your testimony this morning, could I ask you please to take the oath, and
to stand.

ELIZA MASILWANE: (Duly sworn, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I ask Hlengiwe Mkhize to please lead the evidence.

MS MKHIZE: We will talk in English. Dear lady, I will ask you to listen
to me attentively, we will be addressing the whole thing in Sesotho.

MS MASILWANE: Can I speak Sotho, please?

MS MKHIZE: I will talk in English and you will talk in Sotha. Is that in
order? The person who is with you, please introduce her?

MS MASILWANE: It is a family member.

MS MKHIZE: Welcome. I will ask you to tell the Commission a little bit
about yourself and where you come from.

MS MASILWANE: My name is Eliza Masilwane. I come from Meadowlands.

	It was on the 14th of September in 1977.

MS MKHIZE: I have asked you to tell the Commission your name and where
you come from and then we will help you to tell your story. They have to
know you first.

MS MASILWANE: Okay. May I carry on?

MS MKHIZE: Yes.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	E MASILWANE

MS MASILWANE: It was on the 14th of September in 1977, when I got shot by
the boers. I was just coming from home, with my friends, two of my
friends. We were accompanying one who was coming from Zonwan. At the time
when I was injured I was pregnant. Now we were accompanying the one who
was coming from Zonwan. At the time when I got shot, we were just taking
the corner of our street. We met children coming running as they were
approaching us. By the time when we were supposed to meet up with the
children, that was the time when the boers were shooting. Now that's when
I got shot on my stomach. My friend was shot on her thigh. 	I managed to
run up to the time I got home. When I got home we closed the door,
because we were so scared and frightened. But I couldn't feel that I was
shot actually. The person that I could see that she was shot, is my
friend. I didn't see anything from my side. I just felt words around my
head that I was shot actually.

	Our neighbours came and they made me sit down, and my cousin's sister
left to look for a car from the neighbour. At the time when I was getting
into the car, it was the time that my mom was coming from work. I got
into the car together with my mother and her friend. They took me to
Baraghwanath Hospital. When we arrived at Baraghwanath I therfore was
sort of unconscious, I could not therefore see what was happening. I was
actually unconscious.

	When I regained my consciousness it was already at night. I stayed like
that throughout the night up until the following day. The next day I
stayed the whole day like that and I was operated in the night of the
following day, on the 15th. I was operated and I delivered at the time.

	My child was shot on the shoulder. We where at

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	E MASILWANE

Baraghwanath. Over the weekend my mother came to the hospital to visit
me. She was with my father. When they arrived, after some time they
arrived, my sister came also. She was with her friend.

	I want to apologise, I am not too sure whether it was the time when they
were coming, I can't quite remember whether I was already under police
guard. I was under guard at Baraghwanath, from the 19th of September up
to the 26th of September. It was a woman policeman who was in charge of
guarding me.

	On the day when my sister came with her friend, this lady policeman
left. When she got back she was with the White policeman. They took my
parents out of the ward where I was. That ward which I was in, you will
be the only one in it. They took them out from the room. They told my
parents that when they come to the hospital they shall bring their IDs
with. If their pass do not have my surname, they shall not come to the
hospital to visit me. I end there.

MS MKHIZE: I would request that you tell the Commission of how old you
were in 1977.

MS MASILWANE: I was 17 years old.

MS MKHIZE: Can you tell the Commission briefly what you were doing, were
you a scholar or were you working at that time?

MS MASILWANE: I was not working, I was not a scholar.

MS MKHIZE: Can you tell us if you were a member of any organisation where
you were staying?

MS MASILWANE: I was not involved in any movement or any organisation.

MS MKHIZE: You have told us that you met the police, like they were
chasing the school children. Did they speak to

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	E MASILWANE

you or anything or did they just decide to shoot you?

	Can we just check whether she is in Sisotho because I am talking in
Sotha and it seems like she isn't listening ...

	You said you were not aware that they shot you, you thought that they
only shot your friend. When we arrived at home, still you were not
feeling any pain that something has happened.

MS MASILWANE: I wasn't feeling anything, I didn't feel anything. Because
I could run. I could run from the corner to my home, I didn't feel
anything. Because after I closed the door at home, my friend was standing
opposite me, we were looking at each other. I just saw her, that she was
shot, until I felt that I was wet. When I checked I could see that I was
shot.

MS MKHIZE: You have told us again that by the time you were pregnant,
were you in your last days of pregnancy or how?

MS MASILWANE: It was my ninth month.

MS MKHIZE: And you said again you were told by the doctors that your
child also is injured? Maybe, can you remember how did you feel about
that?

MS MASILWANE: My child was stitched.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you very much. By coming to the Truth Commission, what
were your expectations, because a lot of people are coming and we know we
must do something. But even the people are also coming with their own
expectations, they need some help.

MS MASILWANE: Initially, even when I was shot, you want to know if I am
expecting something from the Government or it is my own recommendations?

MS MKHIZE: I am saying, in your statement we have seen that SOWETO
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	E MASILWANE

you haven't made any case. You just came to the Truth Commission, maybe
there is something that you believe that we can do for you, concerning
this issue.

MS MASILWANE: I want to know the people who shot me and I would like to
know the reason and I want to know what was their response when they
heard that they have shot a pregnant woman. Instead they expected me to
go to the police station to make a statement.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you. I would like to give the opportunity to the
Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much Eliza and Hlengiwe.

	I am pleased to announce that we have been joined by Thom Manthata who
is a committee member on the Reparations and Rehabilitation Committee. I
would first ask Yasmin if she has any questions, and then Tom.

MS SOOKA: Eliza, I am going to talk to you in English. Can you hear me
properly or can you hear the translation? I just want to be clear
regarding some issues. At the time when you were shot, you were not
involved in any of the student movements in your particular area.

MS MASILWANE: No.

MS SOOKA: You were just an ordinary person out, taking a walk.

MS MASILWANE: Yes.

MS SOOKA: As the students were running with the soldiers following them,
did they issue any kind of warning before the shooting began?

MS MASILWANE: No, there was no warning.

MS SOOKA: What exactly happened? You saw them running and you started
running as well, and that is when you were shot. Can you just clear that
for me.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	E MASILWANE

MS MASILWANE: I didn't run when I saw the children running, because I
didn't even know the reason why they are running.

MS SOOKA: Could you - you told us about the fact that you were pregnant.
Could you tell us about whether your birth was normal? That is the first
question.

MS MASILWANE: That is the first-born.

MS SOOKA: That baby that you were carrying, when you went to hospital,
was that birth normal, because you had been shot?

MS MASILWANE: I was operated, but my second born was a normal birth.

MS SOOKA: In your statement you say that the child that you gave birth to
had to be stitched on his shoulder because of the shots. Is that correct?

MS MASILWANE: Yes, it's true. He was stitched.

MS SOOKA: Did your father sue the police or the soldiers?

MS MASILWANE: He didn't do anything.

MS SOOKA: You yourself didn't speak to any lawyer about your own case?

MS MASILWANE: No.

MS SOOKA: Your child that was born, the one that was shot because of the
bullet, the bullet touched his shoulder, so it had to be stitched up.
Today, does he suffer from any problems because of that or is he a normal
little boy?

MS MASILWANE: He is normal, there is nothing wrong with him.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Manthata?

MR MANTHATA: I want to ask if the school children, were they coming from
the neighbouring school?

MS MASILWANE: They were wearing a uniform, I don't know

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	E MASILWANE

what school were they coming from. They were just wearing black and white.

MR MANTHATA: Is there a neighbouring school?

MS MASILWANE: Yes, there is one.

MR MANTHATA: While you were watching the children, was it clear that they
were going somewhere or were they just running? Was it during break or
were they going to the nearest shop to buy some food?

MS MASILWANE: It was not during school hours. It was about four or five
in the evening.

MR MANTHATA: But these children were still wearing their school uniform?

MS MASILWANE: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: In other words, if I understand you clearly, you are saying
the police were just shooting randomly?

MS MASILWANE: We can't say, if the children are coming from school. Yes,
by that time, I don't think they were coming from school.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Eliza, I want to thank you very much for coming to tell your
story to the Commission. Before you leave could I just explain to people
that we are about to break for tea. Could people please respect the
witnesses and wait until the witnesses have had a chance to get up and
get out, and we would like to invite the witnesses to join us in what
must be the vestry, underneath. If the witnesses could please be allowed
to leave first. We will gather in 20 minutes time again. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Eliza.

COMMISSION ADJOURNS





SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

