
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 18.04.96			NAME: NTSOMIKAZI EVELYN MATA

CASE: EC0036/96 - EAST LONDON

DAY 4

__________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: We invite Mrs Ntsomikazi Evelyn Mata to the stand please.
Good morning, you are Mrs Mata? You are very welcome.

MRS NTSOMIKAZI EVELYN MATA: 	(sworn states)

DR BORAINE: Mrs Mata, we have already heard that in the last 30 years
there has been a great deal of conflict in South Africa. Some of it
coming from the state, some of it coming from resistance movements, but
tragically there's also been differences between organisations and the
story you're going to tell today has something to do with that. You have
waited a very long time to tell this story. The incident that you will
talk about happened in 1985. We hope that in the telling of this story,
you will be comforted and that you will also be helped. In leading the
evidence, we have Mr Tsiki Sandi and he will assist you to tell the story
that's in your heart. Thank you.

MR SANDI: Perhaps I should start off by explaining to the panel that
initially Sindile Mata the son who's sitting next to Mrs Mata was going
to testify here but that had to be changed because Mrs Mata is now
available. She was not going to be available at first.

	Mrs Mata, in the explanation, you know you will be adding to what your
son Sindile has already said. You said Thembisile your son was injured on
the 26th of July 1985, is that so?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	N E MATA

MRS MATA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Can you just briefly tell us what was Thembisile doing? What
was he doing in his life?

MRS MATA: Thembisile was studying here at Queenstown and he went to Port
Alfred to study there. Well I received a telephone call one afternoon at
work and I was told to be at Port Alfred very urgently, something
terrible had happened. It was Thembisile and Moja, his friend.

	We left from work, we went to the location and we were taken there by
the teacher Mr Makupula by a van. He took us to Port Alfred. When we
reached Port Alfred, we found a gentleman who was at BAB. He said to me,
"Mrs Mata, something terrible has happened. It was terrible here at Port
Alfred. We report the people who are dead now".

	We went with Mr Makupula from Port Alfred to the police station. The
police led us to the scene of the funeral. We found the people there.
When we arrived here we were asked if we would like to see the victims
and we agreed to that. We were taken by Mrs Andoni, Moja's mother, to
where the bodies were. When we reached this place, there was a small
house in which we were accommodated and then this house was opened and we
were shown the bodies.

	When we saw the bodies I was unable to control myself. I was hurt
because they were pitch black and you couldn't identify them as their
faces were unrecognisable but he removed the cover, he was dried out, his
knees were fixed together, then one of my sons said to me, "I didn't want
to come and identify the bodies". Then we went with Mr Makupula to the
location where Thembisile was working. At his place of employment we were
given his belongings and then we went back home to Grahamstown.

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	N E MATA

	When we reached there the teacher who accompanied us was staying at K
Street. My husband was ill at the time, and when Mr Makupula came in, you
know I strengthened myself and tried to be as brave as possible because I
didn't want to make my husband realise that there was something terrible,
but the tears just dropped from my eyes. Mr Mata was told to come and
listen to what has happened. He was given the report back about the bad
tidings. It was mentioned that they were no longer alive. He was shocked
to learn about this. It was on a Wednesday and this happened the night
before.

	At Port Alfred we had arranged some of the things with the undertakers.
We had already got the coffins so that the funeral arrangements can go on
undisturbed. When we reached our destination in Grahamstown we went to
the place of employment, we were asked what we were going to do. We told
them that we have already made funeral arrangements. Our manager Mrs
Rodment said to us, they learned at Port Alfred the dead children would
be escorted here. We agreed to the fact that they should be transported
to their places. It was said they should not be kept for a long time
because they were already damaged.

	The funeral took place on a Saturday. Thembisile and Moja were buried on
the same day. They were different denominations Etheopean and the
Methodist.

MR SANDI: Can I ask, was Moja attending school with his nephew?

MRS MATA: Yes, this child was at Grahamstown and the mother was a teacher
at Shawbury. The child had visited Port Alfred but he was not attending
school there.

MR SANDI: Is it true that Moja and your son were friends?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	N E MATA

MRS MATA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Moja had visited his friend your son?

MRS MATA: Yes it is so.

MR SANDI: As you know Mrs Mata, when something has happened, especially a
very terrible thing, there are people who always give an account of what
has taken place and there are varied stories giving you differing
information.

MRS MATA: Yes it is so.

MR SANDI: When you listened to this as parents, what information did you
get about the details?

MRS MATA: It was reported that there was a meeting which was held and all
the members were there. I realised that during the meeting there was a
difference of opinion between Moja and Thembisile and then they went out.

MR SANDI: In other words you want to say that there was a difference of
opinion when the people were discussing something?

MRS MATA: Yes it is so.

MR SANDI: This difference, was it related to organisations or what was it
related to? Or do you think it was a difference of opinions because we
are individuals?

MRS MATA: I believe that was a difference and a fight between the two
organisations.

MR SANDI: Who gave you this information?

MRS MATA: We got this information from the community of Port Alfred.

MR SANDI: Was there any legal investigation? Or were any statements given
to the police after that or was a case held?

MRS MATA: Yes there was a case held, because during the time that we went
to Port Alfred it was said that there is,

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	N E MATA

I cannot remember who was found, but it was said that somebody was found
living, and this person was arrested.

	When we went to the police station there was somebody who was unable to
look at us, but I didn't want to see this person, because he was
shielding himself, and it was said that that person was present at the
struggle which had taken place.

MR SANDI: Who told you this?

MRS MATA: The people who came here frequently.

MRS MATA: In other words, do you think it was a policeman or was it just
a person there?

MRS MATA: No it was just somebody who was just there, he was not a
policeman.

MR SANDI: Did this person give you this information as parents?

MRS MATA: Yes. When we were sitting here, because Port Alfred is a bushy
area, we saw that through the bushes there were people who were just
peeping through, and I said to Mrs Antoni, " Noweto can you see that
there are people there among the bushes who are looking directly at us?"

MR SANDI: Did you meet this person who gave you the information there at
the police station? Did this person just say they were pointing out the
person who was present during the fight?

MRS MATA: No he just told us that information and then he disappeared, we
didn't know where they are, he just insisted that the person who was
shielding himself was the same person who was there.

MR SANDI: Have you ever seen this person before?

MRS MATA: No, because he was shielding himself, I couldn't see and
identify him. He was really making sure that we

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	N E MATA

couldn't see his face.

MR SANDI: Had the people who heard this, because you sent the child to
school and then he got injured as you have explained, then you were
expected to make arrangements for the funeral? When you made these
funeral arrangements, were there any problems that you encountered.

MRS MATA: Yes we collected money, we did everything that is expected when
making arrangements for a funeral.

MR SANDI: Were there any problems that you encountered.

MRS MATA: No.

MR SANDI: With whom was he staying where he was accommodated?

MRS MATA: There were two ladies, they were just hiring their house to
anybody who needed it.

MR SANDI: Is this a room that they rented inside or outside the premises?

MRS MATA: No they were separate houses. My son was staying alone because
there was nobody else that I was shown. This aged woman just said to me
that that is where my son was staying.

MR SANDI: You said there was nothing which was.... (end of side A of tape
18)

(side B)....didn't find anything, they said nothing was tangible that a
finger could be pointed at but, they were people from Port Alfred.

MR SANDI: One of your children attended?

MRS MATA: No my son was at work. This lady who is next to me is not her.

MR SANDI: Did you go to any attorney?

MRS MATA: No we didn't.

MR SANDI: So you just did this on your own?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	7	N E MATA



MRS MATA: Yes we did. My family went to attend the court, they didn't
hear anything that was worth listening to. so we never followed this case
up.

MR SANDI: If I understand you well, you request that the Commission
should be able to make through investigations to establish exactly what
happened to your son? Is that so?

MRS MATA: Yes it is so.

MR SANDI: Do you have anything further that you would like to discuss in
connection with this?

MRS MATA: Yes, I would like the Commission should assist me so that we
can make something worthy and dignified for Thembisile.

MR SANDI: You say your son was a member of which organisation? Was it the
Azanian People's Organisation, AZAPO?

MRS MATA:	 Yes he was.

MR SANDI: Did they come to you after this terrible incident? Did you ask
AZAPO?

MRS MATA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Did they come to explain what happened to you?

MRS MATA: Yes there were a few young who came after the funeral. They
said they'd come to request Thembisile's photo, because they said it was
wanted by the senior officials in the organisation. So we said we don't
have any photograph.

MR SANDI: When was this?

MRS MATA: It was after the funeral.

MR SANDI: What did they want the photo for?

MRS MATA: I cannot say. But they just said it was wanted by the senior
officials. I said he didn't have any

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8	N E MATA

photograph.

MR SANDI: I realise that in your explanation you state that Thembisile
has a daughter, Ayanda Ntwisha who is doing standard three?

MRS MATA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Where is she now?

MRS MATA: She's staying with her biological mother, at K Street, but
she's attending school at Josa in Grahamstown. At times he just visits us
and during vacations he always visits our family.

MR SANDI: Thank you very much Mrs.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Are there people who would like to ask
questions?

DR ORR: I just have one question for you if I might Mrs Mata and that is
you said something about wanting something dignified, maybe I haven't
understood the interpretation. What did you mean by something dignified
for your son, can you explain to me please?

MRS MATA: I didn't understand your question.

DR ORR: When we asked you what you wanted us as a Commission to do for
you, the first thing you said is that you wanted something dignified,
something special for your son. Can you explain to me a little bit more
what that is?

MRS MATA: Yes I can. I should have some money so that I can make a
dignified funeral for my child.

DR ORR: Thank you very much.

DR BORAINE: Mrs Mata I want to take you back to the time when you went
back to Port Alfred and you say that you, are you alright Mrs Mata?

MRS MATA: I'm also receiving treatment because I was highly affected by
what happened at the time.

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9	N E MATA

DR BORAINE: Mrs Mata, can I go on? You told us that your son Thembisile
was burned to death in the shack?

MRS MATA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Was that the actual cause of death?

MRS MATA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Now you also say that the night before this happened he
attended a public meeting. A meeting between two organisations. This was
AZAPO and what was the other?

MRS MATA: He was a member of AZAPO. I've forgotten the other one but he
was the AZAPO member.

DR BORAINE: And in your statement you have suggested that the other
organisation was the UDF?

MRS MATA: Yes it is so. Yes I've forgotten, it was UDF.

DR BORAINE: There was a lot of trouble at the meeting?

MRS MATA: Yes it is so.

DR BORAINE: He was killed. Yes the following day I learned that I must go
to Port Alfred because he was dead.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Are there any people who would like to ask questions? Mrs
Mata we are very thankful that you could come here, we also appreciate
what you have done today. We are satisfied about the information that you
gave us. We would like to inform you that we are very sympathetic towards
you, and would like you to realise that we know about these atrocities.
And also we trust that the Commission will be able to assist you and to
listen to your plea because you have presented what we'd like to have.
Thank you very much.

	--------------------------







