	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		24.09.1996	NAME: MERRIAM M MATETE

CASE NUMBER: 01535 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 2

_________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Chairperson, before we go on I would just like to welcome a
number of people who are present here today. Councillor Jovane - would
you please stand - welcome - from Stilfontein; Councillor Moleme from
Klerksdorp, good morning and welcome to you; Mr Nick Mapele from the
South African Communist Party; also Mr Z Kholweni, also from the
Communist Party; Councillor Seboesengweng, good morning; Councillor
Vubongo; Dizzi Sinde - the ANC Women's League.

	Mrs Matete, good morning, welcome. You have come a long way this
morning, you have come all the way from Leeudoringstad, just like the
people before you, who came all the way from Makwassie or Lebaleng, which
is just outside Makwassie. Prof Piet Meiring is going to be helping you
with your statement. Before I hand over to him can you first of all
introduce the young man who is with you this morning?

MRS MATETE: The one who is sitting beside me is my last born, he is
Lister Matete.

DR RANDERA: Welcome to you too. Mrs Matete, will you please stand to take
the oath.

MERRIAM M MATETE: (Duly sworn, states).

DR RANDERA: Thank you, Mrs Matete. Will you please sit down. Prof Meiring?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	M M MATETE

PROF MEIRING: Mrs Matete, welcome from me too. I do hope you find this a
good experience, telling us the story of you and of your husband. Before
I ask you to tell about your husband and I just want to have our records
corrected. How old are you? That information is not in the record, when
were you born?

MRS MATETE: I was born in 1929 on the 6th of May.

PROF MEIRING: And have you been living in Leeudoringstad all your life?

MRS MATETE: I was born in Schweizer-Reneke and I was married to a
policeman and we moved to Makwassie and from Makwassie we moved to
Leeudoringstad. We moved to Leeudoringstad in 1957.

PROF MEIRING: How many children do you have?

MRS MATETE: I have ten children, five daughters and five boys.

PROF MEIRING: Good planning. (Laughter).

	Just a last question. You are going to tell us about your husband, what
work did he do? Was he a policeman?

MRS MATETE: My husband was a policeman in 1957 and we moved to Makwassie,
he was still a policeman. The last transfer was to Leeudoring, where he
met his fate and he was already discharged from the police services, he
was discharged in 1960.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. And now please tell us what happened
in Leeudoringstad with yourself and also with your husband.

MRS MATETE: The problems started, he became the mayor after he was
discharged. There was a crime that the rent is still paid. And he was
against this money that was paid. He said no, other places are not paying
this money anymore, and he

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	M M MATETE

said why do we have to pay this money here at Leeudoringstad. He was a
very active member of the ANC Civic. Every Saturday at three o'clock we
would come together as mothers and fathers and he was our adviser. He
would tell us not to do anything that was against the law. He was the
adviser.

	One day as he was our adviser in our meetings, there were a few
Coloureds who were protesting, asking what meetings do we hold, and we
sent two of the CIDs, the other one said he was from Klerksdorp and the
other one was Mamogoba. They arrived. They greeted us and we welcomed
them and they took their seats. They asked my husband as to what he was
doing int he civic, and he explained to him his role. They said please
take one of your secretaries to bring us your minutes, we want to read
them. This woman who was our secretary was Queen. They went to Queen and
she brought the book with her, and the CIDs took the book. They perused
through the minutes and they realised that it was not something that is
not against the law. They greeted us good-bye. They said maybe when we
come the second time around, it is not going to be in this way. They left.

	My husband was the adviser of the Civic in the ANC. He was a very
sympathetic person towards those people who were being manhandled.

PROF MEIRING: You say in your statement that during this time many
residents were being forced out of the location to an open area, now
called Mandela. Were those people who lived within the township and
forced to squat outside the township?

MRS MATETE: I think the statement was not correctly written. But the
people who were squatters in the yards,

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	M M MATETE

were being removed. The youth was saying they should vacate the yards and
they should go and reside at the squatter camp called Mandela. It was on
the morning of that day.

PROF MEIRING: That day, both you and your husband were assaulted by the
police.

MRS MATETE: Myself and my husband and this one, we were assaulted by the
police, because when they got into the house, they were dragging in two
Hippos and Mauser cars. They used the back door, they didn't use the
front door. They said on their arrival who is the owner of this house.
The ones who were outside they said no, the owner of the house is inside.
When he got out, they said are you the owner. He said yes. Just that
answer. They started assaulting him. They said you are inciting a bad
spirit among the people, and he fell on his back. That is where they
assaulted him and they were tramping on him. Among them I could see a
person, it is Kutumela whom I know very well and De Kock who was at
Stilfontein.

PROF MEIRING: Were you yourself also assaulted that day?

MRS MATETE: I was also assaulted. But it wasn't on the same day. But on
the day, the other day when I was assaulted, remember they took my
husband with this boy to Digani and after a few days, they came and that
is where Kutumela - it was very early in the morning. He knocked at the
door and he said get out of the house, you think you are clever. He was
just pulling me. We were using the front door and it was a rainy night
the previous night. I was wearing a very light dress. He was grabbing me
by my throat painfully and when he let loose of me I was very dizzy. I
was taken without any clothes, they brought clothes when I was in their
car.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	M M MATETE

PROF MEIRING: To the police office or to prison afterwards?

MRS MATETE: They drove with me and they brought me to Klerksdorp CID
offices.

PROF MEIRING: (Speaker's mike not on) ... to your house.

MRS MATETE: I was arrested with other boys and they were assaulted also.
I requested one of the Black CIDs to call Mr De Kock. He said to me De
Kock is not going to listen to your story, and I said please, just call
him, and De Kock came. I said to him I understand that we are leaving for
Wolmaransstad, can't you let me go and get clean clothes, because this is
not enough for me. And he said go and get the red Kombi and I was glad
because I realised that I actually saved these three Coloured boys that
were assaulted. We were all taken in that Kombi to Leeudoring, that is
where we slept in the cell.

PROF MEIRING: For how long did you stay in the cells?

MRS MATETE: The same day we were - we spent just one night. I think my
husband spoke to Mr Motala who was a lawyer, because we were released and
a Black lawyer came and we went with him to Wolmaransstad. Our case was
just dropped.

PROF MEIRING: So there was no finding in your case. I want to add just
one question. Your husband is now departed, he has died. When did your
husband die?

MRS MATETE: He passed away in April 1994. After the assault he was crying
of pain every time at the back and with kidneys it seemed he had a
problem. He was blaming these people who assaulted him actually. He had
been complaining until the last day.

PROF MEIRING: (Speaker's mike not on) ... the assault.

MRS MATETE: Yes, it affected me because my husband was the breadwinner
and he was actually educating his ten children.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	M M MATETE

And this affected us a lot really.

PROF MEIRING: Your health was not affected, you don't have back ache or
any other thing that came from the assaults?

MRS MATETE: I was assaulted and such a young hefty man was really
grabbing me with my throat. You know, as I grew up, I had mumps and they
are still troubling me up till today.

PROF MEIRING: Mrs Matete, thank you so much. You have told us the story
of yourself and of your husband, but I think that my colleagues at the
table would like to add a few questions of their own. Thank you from my
side.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Matete, from my calculation you were 61 years old at the
time when this happened. How old was your husband?

MRS MATETE: He was 68 years old, he was born in 1922.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma, can you tell me the lawyer that helped you, was that
Ichbal or Ahmad Motala?

MRS MATETE: I do not know their initials, but I know he was a Mr Motala
and the doctor who was helping my husband was also a Dr Motala.

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma, was it normal in the - or usual - in the townships
that when they picked you up they would pick old people up with young
comrades, and that they would force them to undress or they would be
embarrassed in front of younger people?

MRS MATETE: It was not a common practice. Their problem was that my
husband was inciting the youth this bad spirit and they were saying he
was making the people to be against the Coloured people.

CHAIRPERSON: How long after the assault did your husband die?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	M M MATETE

MRS MATETE: He was assaulted in that year when the shacks were removed to
Mandela Park and three years thereafter in 1994 he passed away, but
in-between he was a sickly person, he couldn't do anything for himself.

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma, after the assault, did you instruct any lawyers to
bring a claim against the police for what they did to you?

MRS MATETE: No, we didn't make any claim, because I was even scared of
White people, I wouldn't even go close to them.

CHAIRPERSON: Order, please! Thank you, Mamma. Dr Randera has a question.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Matete, I just want to again understand the events of
those few days. Everything happened in Leeudoringstad. Is that right?
Initially.

MRS MATETE: That's correct, Sir.

DR RANDERA: And then firstly your husband and your son were taken to
Digane outside Klerksdorp.

MRS MATETE: That is correct.

DR RANDERA: And then a few days later you were also taken to Klerksdorp?

MRS MATETE: I was also taken to Klerksdorp, that is correct.

DR RANDERA: Now was that a normal thing to happen, did they not have a
police station in Leeudoringstad? Why were police coming all the way from
Klerksdorp to arrest you?

MRS MATETE: There were police nearby, but at Leeudoring there were no
CIDs. The Hippos were also driven by policemen whom I do not know.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma, thank you for sharing that story with

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	M M MATETE

us. We recognise that you must have suffered. You were not at a young age
when this assault was done to you and your husband and it is humiliating
at that age, as well as quite frightening, I think that it should have
happened, and that it should have happened by those people who should
have protected you. We share your pain and we hope that in the telling of
your story to us, that you will have felt some kind of release. You have
named the people whom you recognised and who were part of this and we
thank you for sharing that information with us. We will pass it on to our
investigation unit.

MRS MATETE: I also thank you. I want to thank the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission that has offered us an opportunity to open our
hearts. These things have been in my heart for quite some time, and you
know I wouldn't go to sleep at all, and I think I have taken everything
out of my heart and God will help me to ease the pain that was within me.
I am glad that you are here. We can see that we are not on our own, you
are with us.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mamma, for sharing that.



	--------------



















KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

