TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

DAY 3 - 16 OCTOBER 1996



APOLOGIES TO TWO FAMILIES AND THE COMMUNITY

PHILEMON MAKINA MAXAM



PHILEMON MAKINA MAXAM		Duly sworn states



MS GOBODO:

Good morning Mr Maxam can you hear me?

MR MAXAM:

Good morning Ms Chairperson.

MS GOBODO:

What is your clan name?

MR MAXAM:

Msango Kwalo.

MS GOBODO:

We welcome you - we welcome you this morning as you are going to give
your testimony. A testimony that is different from the usual, a testimony
of forgiveness, this is what this Commission is about.

We thank you for coming forward so that even those people that are still
in the dark can see the necessity of coming forward to ask for
forgiveness. Did you grow up in Mbekweni or did you grow up elsewhere?

MR MAXAM:

I was born in Mbekweni and I grew up in Mbekweni.

MS GOBODO:

Did you go to school in Mbekweni?

MR MAXAM:

Yes I went to school in Mbekweni until std 8.

MS GOBODO:

In 1985 and 1986 there was an organization here in the township, which
one did you belong you? I don’t hear you well - could you come closer to
the mic.

MR MAXAM:

I was a member of MBEKO an affiliation of the UDF.

MS GOBODO:

According to your statement you say you were one of the people in the
leadership of the M-plan, could you elaborate what the M-plan is about so
that everybody understands.

MR MAXAM:

In 1985, or from early ’84 until the end of it all - that is until the
election and political prisoners were released. The M-plan was about
uniting people in communities. It was also about protecting the people
and about alleviating problems in the community.

MS GOBODO:

So the M-plan was really there to implement the struggle and the goals of
this struggle?

MR MAXAM:

Then the M-plan was really the backbone of our communities as - as the
white people interfered.

MS GOBODO:

How did...[intervention]

MR MAXAM:

And also to protect the community.

MS GOBODO:

In working with implementing this M-plan please tell us what happened
exactly?

MR MAXAM:

The main reason why I am here today - when - during my prison term even
before this sentence of 25 years, I realized that it is still very dark
in our communities because there are people that I’ve left behind.

MS GOBODO:

Are you talking about your detention or about your imprisonment.

MR MAXAM:

I was sentences, I am still sentences as I speak now.

MS GOBODO:

Why were you sentenced initially?

MR MAXAM:

I was sentenced for the first time for ten years and two death sentences
for having murdered.



MS GOBODO:

So what were you target in the M-plan?

MR MAXAM:

As we should remember the violence in the townships warranted us to
protect ourselves and the community as people who have been shot and
killed and the police will just hang around the townships. They would
just let teargas be in the townships. The M-plan was necessary for such
protection.

MS GOBODO:

According to your statement here, you say that in the process of the
M-plan you would go to specific houses, and the owners of those houses
would as a result be detained or tortured. Which are these people, what
are the names of these people who’s houses you used.

MR MAXAM:

If I were to tell the truth and count the houses that we used, I will
count the whole of Mbekweni, because Mbekweni was a well mobilized
community.

MS GOBODO:

The specific houses that you have listed and the police focused on those
house, which are these houses?

MR MAXAM:

It was Mr Kathakata’s house, Mr Tsotesi house and the Franch house, the
Bongo family. I wish to apologize to the owners of those houses. Because
even in their ignorance they would be taken by the police, be
interrogated and other houses that were affected. I also ask for
forgiveness from the Sieberts family that was also affected.

MS GOBODO:

Could you please tell the Commission about 1986, the incident in 1986
where dr Ivan Sieberts mother died.

MR MAXAM:

We will remember that according to the M-plan then as we had to protect
ourselves, and had to learn to attack the enemy, we needed arms. Because
even the Government was armed within the townships. And the underground
structures of the African National Congress there were opportunities for
us to acquire these firearms. It is in 1986 that I got involved in the
shootings. We had to acquire our arms, as we had to protect ourselves.

MS GOBODO:

Where was this house, was it in town?

MR MAXAM:

This house is not too far from Mbekweni, it is in Vlakplaas.

MS GOBODO:

So what is it exactly that you want to say to the Sieberts family?

MR MAXAM:

I like this question because I will also relieved, because all these
years, even before I was imprisoned my mother and my sister Nosipho said
I should give myself in to the police. But I was scared because the
police had warned me especially Mr Guss he said that where he gets hold
of me, he will shoot me.

Because - he will not take me to prison because I just slip through
fingers. I did not want to give him the satisfaction - this is why I ask
for forgiveness from the Sieberts family and all those people that were
badly affected. Even those who are still in prison, I ask for forgiveness
from the parents of those imprisoned children.

MS GOBODO:

Have you tried to get in touch with the Sieberts family whilst you were
in jail?

MR MAXAM:

The connection was between the ANC branch in Mbekweni, my elder brother
went to the Sieberts family, to ask for forgiveness. They appreciate the
fact that I actually came out to ask for forgiveness, they have forgiven
me.

MS GOBODO:

Would you like to shake hands with the Sieberts family to ensure
forgiveness.

MR MAXAM:

I trust and believe that it is more real for one to shake hands with the
forgiver rather than hear it on the radio or television.

MS GOBODO:

So your request to the Commission is to bring you and the Sieberts family
together so as to ask for forgiveness in person.

MR MAXAM:

I would be very glad.

MS GOBODO:

Is your mother and your sister are they still alive?

MR MAXAM:

Yes fortunately they still alive.



MS GOBODO:

Are they still alive?

MR MAXAM:

Yes they still alive.

MS GOBODO:

Have you liased with them about today?

MR MAXAM:

Fortunately my mother is here today - I think my sister is at work..

MS GOBODO:

I am going to ask you a last question, what is your advice to us in
connection with the Mbekweni community?

MR MAXAM:

So that previous sins are not committed again.

MS GOBODO:

What is your advice to the Commission to ensure reconciliation between
the two sides?

MR MAXAM:

As I’ve always said, besides the fact that I am here in the Commission, I
think it is important that what is in the dark, that was performed in the
previous resume, should be put in the light now.

People should come forward, especially people from Mbekweni. Mbekweni is
a peaceful community, you can walk even in the middle of the night and
nothing will happen to you. Therefore it is becoming, it is only becoming
for people to come forward and confess. I wish the people of Mbekweni
absolute peace, even the people I have not mentioned here. 	

MS GOBODO:

Thank you, I want to read a document here from Ivan Sieberts with the
permission of the Chairperson.

I am very happy that Maxam wants to make peace, because I too, felt the
burden of the anger laying heavily on me over the years, I called his
brother, Pat, last year to my office, and told him that I wanted to make
peace with his family.

I have no grudge against him [that is Philemon] I think that my mother
would have wanted it this way. She was a very kind and forgiving person.
She was shot as she went to fetch a glass of water for Maxam. My mother
would have done that act of kindness to anybody coming to her door. She
was a tipe of person who wouldn’t hold a grudge. So I am glad that
Philemon is doing this for her and for me.

	I think that statement will go a long way in your heart, to relieve you,
to relieve your burden. I hope that now you are in peace.

MR MAXAM:

I want to ask for forgiveness yet again, I want to ask my parents to
forgive me, when they heard the news that I had murdered, they were
obviously not happy about it, they were grieved, all these years they
have been so grieved. My father died whilst I was in prison, I ask for
forgiveness from my home, even my children.



MS GOBODO:

Do you have children and a wife?

MR MAXAM:

I don’t have a wife, I have children.

MS GOBODO:

You want them to know that such a thing should not be committed again.
They have seen me, they know where I am at, they know my aims for the
future. Thank you very much Mr Maxam I will ask the Chairperson to take
over.

ADV POTGIETER:

Mr Maxam let me just apologize I haven’t done justice to your surname
when I read the list, but I have learned for better now. I just want to
see if we can’t be of assistance to you as well. The sentence that you
serving at this stage, does it relate to your activities in implementing
the M-plan in Mbekweni.

MR MAXAM:

Yes sir it is so.

ADV POTGIETER:

And were you convicted of - of how many offences?

MR MAXAM:

Two offenses of murder and an offense of having broken into a shop. I was
sentenced to ten years and two sentences of death. But because of my
attorney, Ms Jones, in 1992, 23rd March, according to the petition from
Mbekweni with 68 signatures they then turned my sentence around to 25
years only.

It has been 7 years that I have been in jail, serving that sentence, I
have never - I was never allowed to be bailed out.

ADV POTGIETER:

How long is still left of the sentence, how long must you still serve?

MR MAXAM:

It will be until 2004 - 2007 should I be serving effectively. According
to the new Prison Laws, as a first offender I qualify for this especially
with support from the community.

Profiles have been lost and documents investive - my profile was lost in
the confusion that was in the prisons from - I was at home on the 5th
even this month. I am allowed to go home to see my parents should there
be a problem. I went to a funeral, my nephew’s funeral.

	The Prison authorities, because I work well with the police and with the
community, the parole board will then vote in my favor. I am in the
recreation committee and I work in the library in prison. The parole
board saw me last week on Friday, they will call me after a while.

My release depends wholly on the parole board, I am prepared to serve my
whole sentence. I - it is not that I want to be released through amnesty
as such - I am committed to my responsibilities within the prison.

ADV POTGIETER:

I appreciate that [indistinct] upon the issue that I wanted to come to,
your - of the offenses of which you were committed, were committed within
of which you were convicted were committed within this implementation of
the M-plan obviously within a political context.

And what I wanted to bring to your attention or to ask you is whether you
are aware of the amnesty provisions which relates to this Commission and
whether you have in fact applied?

MR MAXAM:

According to the amnesty committee I have not received a report. I made a
requests to the National Council on Indemnity before the Truth Commission
was established. Therefore they would [indistinct] to me to ensure me -
to inform me as to what happens.

I have been advised to apply for amnesty to the Truth Commission. I will
- I can only follow the procedures if I receive guidance.

ADV POTGIETER:

I just wanted to make sure that you are aware of that possibility, it’s
not something that we deal with as a panel sitting here, we’ve got a
special structure that deals with that, but I just thought we must - we
must ensure that you are aware of that and it seems as if you are in fact
aware of that.

And it would be a pity if a person in your position, an application from
you is not considered or is not brought to the Commission at least for
consideration. So I thank you very much for that information.

MS GOBODO:

Thank you, you may go.

