
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	24-09-1996		NAME: PINANA MAZAKA

CASE: DUNCAN VILLAGE

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:	Then we shall call Pinana Mazaka.

REVD XUNDU:	Pinana Mazaka, will you please rise.

PINANA MAZAKA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	We welcome you Mr Mazaka. We are going to hand over to Mr
Maya to ask questions on behalf of the Commission.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. I greet you Mr Mazaka. Can you hear
me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me Mr Mazaka?

P MAZAKA:	Yes, I can hear you.

MS MAYA:	Today, you are going to tell us about your brother's death, who
is Mike Mazaka who was shot dead by the SADF on the 2nd of September
1985. Can you tell us what really happened?

P MAZAKA:	Yes, I can tell you. Yes, I can tell you, but I don't have
enough information, I'll only tell you about what I know.

MS MAYA:	Carry on please.

P MAZAKA:	On that day of Mike's death I was in the house. People came to
tell me that he was shot in his yard of which it was the very same street
from where I was staying.

	I went there with those people to the scene. I saw him, he was laying at
the door of his shack. There was another van that was just passing.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			P MAZAKA

	The people seeked for help from that particular van, that's how I got to
notice.

MS MAYA:	Was he shot in his shack or somewhere else?

P MAZAKA:	Nobody really saw what happened, whether he was shot inside his
shack or outside, but what we realise is that inside his shack and the
door was broken, it looked like the door was locked when it was being
kicked.

	From the side of the handle was still like that, was still the same, it
was still locked, but the door was open, but it was still locked.

	And some of the furniture in the shack could show that something was
happening.

MS MAYA:	In your statement you said that he was shot by the SADF. Were
there any people who witnessed this?

P MAZAKA:	The people who saw this were also being chased by the soldiers.
Those are the witnesses. Although those people would not be able to go to
the court and give evidence.

MS MAYA:	How old was Mike?

P MAZAKA:	Mike was 30 years old at that time.

MS MAYA;	Was he working?

P MAZAKA:	Yes, he was working.

MS MAYA:	Did he have any family, wife or children?

P MAZAKA:	No, he didn't have any family.

MS MAYA:	Where was Mike working?

P MAZAKA;	He was working in Gauteng, but at the time of his death, he was
not working, he was just a taxi driver.

MS MAYA:	After his death, was there any investigation or maybe did you
lay any charges or maybe did you approach some attorneys?

P MAZAKA;	No, there is nothing that we did.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			P MAZAKA

MS MAYA;	Before his funeral, was there any post mortem that was conducted?

P MAZAKA:	Yes. After his death, I was called by the police, Cambridge
police because at the time of his death, we stopped a certain van and we
put him in that van and we rushed to the Aroma hospital, because if we
were to take him to the hospital, we would be arrested by the very same
soldiers. We went to Aroma, the Reverend there called a Doctor.

	The Doctor came. The Doctor certified him dead and then we were escorted
by the Doctor to the hospital. We had to make a statement like of who was
taking him to the hospital so in that hospital they took my name down.

	This thing took place in the evening, the following day I went home to
tell them about Mike's death.

	Me and my brother left, we went to Duncan Village. We had to go to the
hospital because we thought that he was still there, but we were told
that he is not there any more, he is at Cambridge.

	Even at Cambridge, we were not allowed to see him before the post
mortem, which was going to take place the following day. The following
day we went to the Cambridge police station again and we had to wait
until after the post mortem.

	Then we went to identify him.

MS MAYA:	Do you know perhaps the reason of his death, why was he shot?

P MAZAKA:	I don't have any reason that I can think about, besides the
fact that where Mike was staying on that particular day there was a
shooting, there was a shooting on that particular day of his death.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			P MAZAKA

	There were also other people who were shot and their houses that were
shot at, they still have holes even today.

MS MAYA:	Was he a member of any political organisation, or maybe he was
playing any role in politics?

P MAZAKA:	I can't remember, I can't remember him being any member, a
member of any organisation.

MS MAYA:	Do you have any request that you would like to bring forward to
the Commission just before we conclude?

P MAZAKA:	All I can say is this, it is clear that the soldiers at the
time were just shooting randomly.

	Because two days before this day of his death, the soldiers were in our
yard, they were saying that they were looking for Xome.

	My wife was laying out the table for supper, they were looking for this
Xome. We don't even know that Xome, we don't know who is Xome.

	One of them said I'm hungry, because my wife was afraid, she offered him
a plate and then he uttered something in Afrikaans, saying it is
delicious.

	We couldn't even eat that day because they decided to take our food.

MS MAYA:	After that, do you mean that they ate all that food and you were
left with nothing?

P MAZAKA:	Yes, this food was only enough for two people, because in the
house it was only me and my wife.

MS MAYA:	Mr Mazaka, is there any request?

P MAZAKA:	All I can say is this, the Commission will see what to do with
this matter.

MS MAYA:	Thank you very much, Mr Mazaka, I'm going to hand you over to Mr
Chairperson, maybe he might have some questions.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			P MAZAKA

MR FINCA:	Mr Sandi. Silence please.

MR SANDI:		Mr Mazaka, do you remember the name of the person whom you
said he is the witness who saw this incident?

P MAZAKA:	Yes, I remember his name. His name is Xolani Swelendao.

MR SANDI:	Where is this Xolani?

P MAZAKA:	Xolani is available. He is here in East London, maybe he is
here in this hall, but I am not sure.

MR SANDI:	Thank you very much.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you very much Mr Mazaka. We have listened with great
interest to your story and the request. We have taken note of that, we
also hope that even the people who ate your food, we will be able to
investigate them as to what was the reason for that.

	If there is something else that they would like to know from you, the
Commission's investigators will contact you. For now, we can say thank
you very much.

	--------------------

