	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	POLINA NOLESE MBALULA		

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 1



REVD FINCA:	We ask Polina Nolese Mbalula to come forward please. We
realise that there is a lot of people in this hall. We also realise that
a lot of people are uncomfortable because there is not enough space, we
expected that in Cradock the hall would be this full, but we do trust
that people will be disciplined because people from Cradock have been
disciplined by the struggle.

	Thank you. We just want to remind you that the people who come to
testify before us, should be given reverence, they come here and tell
their stories. We welcome you Mrs Mbalula, the Reverend Xundu will swear
you in and Mrs June Crichton will lead the evidence.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman.

POLINA NOLESE MBALULA:	(sworn states)

MRS CRICHTON:	We welcome you Mrs Mbalula and according to your statement
here, we are going to hear about the death of Nobeki Mbalula. Can you
tell me first of all what her role was? We have to start again, can you
hear me?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, I can hear you.

MRS CRICHTON:	We welcome you to this Commission and we are here to talk
about your sister-in-law Nobeki Mbalula. Would you tell me first of all
what her role in the community was?

MRS MBALULA:	She did not have a particular role in the community. She was
not doing anything.

MRS CRICHTON:	I understand according to your statement,

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	PN MBALULA

that she was a member of the ANC, is that right?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, she was just a member of the ANC, she was not a leader
as such, she was a member like all of us.

MRS CRICHTON:	And your relationship to her is as sister-in-law, is that
correct?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, she was my sister-in-law.

MRS CRICHTON:	... that day, can you give us a little bit of an idea of
what was actually happening in Venterstad at that time? What was the
situation in the community?

MRS MBALULA:	The children were quite involved in the struggle. The one
time they burnt down the car from the Municipality. After a week a hippo
came.

INTERPRETER:	The witness is going to fast, the witness is going to fast.

MRS CRICHTON:	Would you like to just begin again telling us what happened
when the hippo came. Start from that point.

MRS MBALULA:	All right. My sister-in-law, Nobeki, had gone to visit her
mother with her husband. It was a Sunday, when they were coming back the
police were shooting around the township.

	They were in a casper. She also unfortunately got shot. She ran away,
she ran and tried to hide under a caravan. The police continued to shoot.

	She got shot again whilst hiding under the caravan. She got shot in the
head.

MRS CRICHTON:	How were you informed about her death?

MRS MBALULA:	She was with her boyfriend. I could hear that there were gun
shots. She had a child and I was with these children. Her boyfriend then
came and other comrades.

	She could not walk, they had to carry her and put her on the bed. I was
the only one who was in the house who was

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	PN MBALULA

an elderly person. When I went to look at her, I realised that she was no
longer alive. I then had to go and tell her parents that she had passed
away.

MRS CRICHTON:	Are you ready now?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, I am ready.

MRS CRICHTON:	I would like to move on a little bit and ask you - I would
like to ask you whether there was a court case or an inquest of any sort?

MRS MBALULA:	We took the corpse, we were struggling and as we were trying
to take her out, there was a policeman with a gun at the door. Her son
was outside and as he tried to go in, he came across this policeman with
a gun.

	It was difficult for my husband to go and tell our relatives. We then
got a car from other comrades. We took the corpse to the police station.

	There was a comrade called Quabane. The police were arguing with this
comrade and with myself. As she had a baby, the police said that the
corpse can breast feed the baby. We then asked what we should do with the
corpse.

	They said that we could do whatever we wanted to with it. We left the
corpse. On the Monday morning the police continued with shooting around
the township. They would kick down doors.

	We were trying to report to the Venterstad police. On the Monday they
came to our house. They kicked down the door, they ate food, they took
food from the fridge and they ate. The police would continuously come
shooting.

	On the Tuesday they came yet again. We were not at the house, we had
gone to the mortuary. They took my husband's bicycle. They said that it
is impossible for my husband to have such a bicycle, he must have stolen
it. They took it.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	PN MBALULA

	It was difficult to report these cases to the police, because they had
taken somebody's life already.

	They also detained a lot of children from the township. There was no
law, no decorum. They then took my husband to Cape Town for an operation.
He eventually came back.

	When he came back, he was not covered, he was naked. He was at the back
of a bakkie. I then rushed to the bakkie. It was a White policeman that
was there. My husband was no longer alive.

	We went to the mortuary where he was. I could not recognized him as he
had bled a lot. There was blood all over his head. I tried to investigate
and I tried to get help because I had children to look after and also
this baby.

	I kept on going to the Magistrate, the Magistrate sent me to the Social
Workers. The Social Workers could not help me either. I was ill of
health, high blood pressure, heart ailment, even mentally, I was
affected. My husband was not working. He would get temporary jobs. I had
no money. We had to borrow money from our neighbours to bury my husband.

	People wanted their money back and I could not give it back to them. I
asked the Magistrate if the law could not help me, he said no. He then
said that I must get money from Social Workers to pay my debts.

	From there I would be sent back to the police station. The police then
sent me to a police Commander. I wanted a Death Certificate because the
Social Workers needed it. They said that I could not get it before the
case was over. 	They needed to ascertain whether my sister-in-law was
guilty or was it the police that were in the wrong. I had this baby to
look after. Because I had no help, I had to

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	PN MBALULA

take these children to my sister-in-law's ex-husband.

	A Red Cross car came to my house, but there was no one at home, we were
at work.

	When they got to my house, they gave me R600-00 and food. They said that
they could not help me any further. They said that they would feed me for
three months. They were then informed that there is more to the family.

	The R600-00 was divided amongst the members of the family, I was left
with R300-00. My husband ...

INTERPRETER:	The witness is going too fast.

MRS CRICHTON:	Mrs Mbalula, I must ask you to speak more slowly and I need
to ask you a couple of questions at this point and then if there is more
for you to say afterwards, you can add it.

	I need to ask you and take you back to Nobeki's death and ask you very
specifically if you know who the boyfriend was? The name of the boyfriend?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, I do know the name. It was Balabala Tugani.

MRS CRICHTON:	And then as well as that, I would like to know when the
corpse of your sister-in-law was being taken out of the house, there was
a policeman standing at the door. Was it that policeman who said that the
baby could be breast fed by the corpse?

MRS MBALULA:	Those police were from Middelburg. They were in a casper
from Middelburg. Those are the police that said that.

MRS CRICHTON:	Do you know who they are, would you recognise them?

MRS MBALULA:	No, I do not know them, it was the first time I saw them.
They were ill-treating us, they had guns. They

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	PN MBALULA

were drinking alcohol, swearing at us. There was a short one with
alcohol, he is from Middelburg.

	I don't know whether there were any policemen from Venterstad.

MRS CRICHTON:(Indistinct)

MRS MBALULA:	I am not sure. I was just told that they were from
Middelburg. I want to know how did they get here, where did they get the
right to get and kill people at Venterstad. I did not have money to
investigate the whole matter.

MRS CRICHTON:	Mrs Mbalula, there is just one last question. You told us
about your husband and his death, we don't have anything on our statement
about that. Have you actually testified or had information taken down by
the Truth Commission about your husband?

MRS MBALULA:	No, there was a mistake. My husband is not actually dead. It
is my sister-in-law that passed away.

MRS CRICHTON:	Thank you very much indeed. I hand you back to the Chairman
now.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you. Revd Xundu?

REVD XUNDU:	When your sister-in-law was shot, the ANC was already
unbanned, is that so? Should I repeat my question?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes please.

REVD XUNDU:	What I am saying is that when your sister-in-law passed away,
the ANC was no longer banned?

MRS MBALULA:	Do you mean was the ANC in power?

REVD XUNDU:	No, no, but the ANC was unbanned?

MRS MBALULA:	No, it was not unbanned yet.

REVD XUNDU:	I am not asking you Ma'am, I am telling you. Why do you think
that these police did what they did even though the ANC was unbanned?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7	PN MBALULA

MRS MBALULA:	These Boers had no decorum, the children was still in the
struggle, they had burnt down a Municipal police car. They also burnt
down an I&J car that was delivering meat. Then the hippo came, the casper
came and they were shooting everybody in sight.

REVD XUNDU:	So you don't know the names of these police?

MRS MBALULA:	No, I don't, they are from Middelburg. They came in a kombi.

REVD XUNDU:	How many children are you supporting that was supposed to be
supported by your sister-in-law?

MRS MBALULA:	There was four of them, but I gave the other three away and
I looked after the baby. After my sister-in-law passed away, I gave the
children back to their father in Pretoria. I then was left with the baby.

REVD XUNDU:	Who is supporting the children?

MRS MBALULA:	It is the father, I am not in touch with him at all.

REVD XUNDU:	If the Commission would investigate, do you think that these
children would need some kind of compensation?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	So you say that after this terrible incident, after losing
your sister-in-law, started deteriorating?

MRS MBALULA;	Yes, we did not even have much support. We only received the
R600-00 which was divided amongst members of the family.

	We are still in debt as we could not pay all our debts off. People
wanted their money back.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you have records of such debts? Do you have receipts?

MRS MBALULA:	As I was still investigating this whole case,

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8	PN MBALULA

the Magistrate told me that there would be a court case. There was a
court case, the Boers came, they had no respect for any one. It was
almost like they were drunk, they kept on laughing even in court, but
they had their own attorney.

	Even the attorney was not behaving well. I had not legal representative,
but I had hope because I was told that the ANC would send a legal
representative, but they did not.

	I then asked the attorney, I told him that I did not kill my
sister-in-law. I then asked him who is going to pay for the funeral and
support these children. The attorney then asked if my sister-in-law had
not been buried yet.

	I said no, she has been buried, but I had to ask people for money. He
then said I must write a letter recording all the debt. The letter must
then go to the police station, the police station will send it to an
attorney and then the attorney will see what to do.

REVD XUNDU:	Was this said in the presence of the Magistrate, was that the
conclusion, did you follow up, did you take those steps?

MRS MBALULA:	I was not satisfied.

REVD XUNDU:	So the Commission can actually enquire about this conclusion.
Where now is the brother-in-law?

MRS MBALULA:	He is not well, he is a bit deranged. He does work now and
again, but he is deranged.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Ma'am, thank you Mr Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Tiny Maya?

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like to ask you a few questions.
Did you say you went to Social Workers to ask for help? 	Did you get
proper help?

MRS MBALULA:	No, I did not, I am still trying to get help from Social
Workers.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9	PN MBALULA

MS MAYA:	Which Social Workers are these, are they from Venterstad?

MRS MBALULA:	No.

MS MAYA:	Do you know the name?

MRS MBALULA:	It is Van Gonner.

MS MAYA:	Secondly, you talked about a Death Certificate.

MRS MBALULA:	We eventually got the Death Certificate the second time. The
court case - I was investigating the whole case and eventually I got the
Death Certificate.

MS MAYA:	thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Sandi?

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mrs Mbalula, initially when you were
talking, giving evidence you said that in Venterstad there was no law as
such. What did you mean?

	Did you mean that the police did whatever they pleased with the people?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, they did whatever they pleased. The police did whatever
they pleased with the people.

MR SANDI:	Would the people of the community go to the charge office to
press charges?

MRS MBALULA:	People would go but nothing would be done about that. I
realised when I went to press charges, that they did not care.

MR SANDI:	When people would go to the charge office, were they helped by
the police?

MRS MBALULA:	I can't speak for other people, I suppose they would welcome
them when they come there, but they would not make follow ups.

MR SANDI:	Are there other people perhaps a group of people, that had been
beaten or tortured or shot by the police?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, my sister-in-law's son, one of my

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	10	PN MBALULA

sister-in-law's sons, had been beaten by the police. Also a ten year old
and a six year old child. There was teargas, there was an old lady as
well who was blind, who could not walk, but they shot teargas where she
was.

	They did not care.

MR SANDI:	Is there someone in Venterstad, even one person, who was shot
or beaten by police and then the police was arrested and sentenced in a
court of law?

MRS MBALULA:	I have never heard of such. I can only talk about what I
know. I had just arrived at Venterstad, when this chaos erupted.

	These children were just at home, but somehow they would get detained
and beaten up.

MR SANDI:	What I would like to know is that there is not one single
police that got arrested and sentenced in a court of law for having
behaved in such a way?

MRS MBALULA:	I've heard that there is one police who lost his job because
of the way he treated people.

MR SANDI;	Therefor what you are saying is that the police themselves were
the law in Venterstad?

MRS MBALULA:	Yes, I would say that it is so.

MR SANDI:	Thank you. Mrs Mbalula, thank you. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Mrs Polina Mbalula, we thank you for having given us this
picture about your sister-in-law who was shot just walking around the
township.

	It is clear that the police behaved any how, shooting at people. You
have given us the picture of cruelty beyond anybody's imagination.

	It touches us deeply when you tell us that when you were asking the
police, who is going to breast feed this

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	11	PN MBALULA

baby, and the police said, the corpse can do it. That is cruelty. This
shows us that the people in the previous regime of this country, did not
care about the communities.

	You have told us that this endangered your health. We can see that. On
behalf of the Commission we sympathise and empathise with you.

	We promise that if we can help in any way by putting and recording your
story in the report that we will be giving to the President, we will do
all we can.

	We thank you very much, you can go back to your seat now.

	--------------------

