
	1	T MOYESHA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: TOZAMA JENNIFER MOYESHA

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Could we now call upon the next witness. The next witness is
Ms Tozama Jennifer Moyesha, who is going to be lead by Rev Xundu.

TOZAMA JENNIFER MOYESHA: (sworn states)

REV XUNDU: Ms Tozama Moyesha what is your clan name by the way?

MS MOYESHA: I am Mam Qhomasi.

REV XUNDU: Thank you Mam Qhomasi. You have your story here in this
statement which is the same as what was said by other people so I am not
going to bother you much by asking you to say it again. Except that I
would like to confirm whether you were one of those people who were in
that crowd and they met all the shooting that occurred?

MS MOYESHA: Yes, it is like that.

REV XUNDU: Now what happened to you? Could you briefly tell this
Commission what happened to you?

MS MOYESHA: We were coming from Maduna and we were going to a funeral in
Kwanubushle, and we were walking down Maduna Street and there was a hippo
opposite my home. We stood there and this hippo was trying to disperse us
but we walked UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	T MOYESHA

further until we got to section 16 just down the hill. There were hippos
parked next to the John Wesley Church. There was a Rastafarian from us
who went to those, and he came back and we decided to stop singing
because he said that these Whites where saying that we were not going to
proceed to Kwanubushle.

REV XUNDU: Do you mean that this Rasta doesn't have a name because people
have been referring to this person as a Rasta? What is his actual name,
because we would like to know his name?

MS MOYESHA: I really don't know his name.

REV XUNDU: But he is known as the Rastafarian?

MS MOYESHA: Yes.

REV XUNDU: You were shot by the police then?

MS MOYESHA: Yes, the Whites shot us.

REV XUNDU: So, you just heard from the Rastafarian, you did not hear the
police saying there was no funeral?

MS MOYESHA: Yes, it is the Rastafarian who told us we were not going to
Kwanubushle. Then we said to the Rastafarian, if they say we are not
going to Kwanubushle, we are going to take a short cut and walk.

REV XUNDU: And as a result of that, you were attacked by the Whites?

MS MOYESHA: Yes, they shot us.

REV XUNDU: Then, what did you see?

MS MOYESHA: I saw some people running away, some were on the floor and
when I was trying to run away, they shot me on the back and here on the
buttock and my false teeth, I lost them and when I was trying to pick
them up, they shot me here on the arm, and here on my leg.

REV XUNDU: And then, how did you get your help?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	T MOYESHA

MS MOYESHA: An ambulance took me to the provincial hospital and they
drained some blood from my system and then I was taken to the Livingstone
hospital.

REV XUNDU: And were you discharged and went home?

MS MOYESHA: Yes, they discharged me and I was put into a police van and I
asked what now, they said the ambulances were busy, that was the reason
why they were putting me into a police van. Then I became conscious
because one of the victims was with me there and they asked me to alight
from the van and as I was getting off from the van they opened the door
of the van as if ...(intervention)

CHAIRPERSON: We will be asking for another witness and then we will come
back to Ms Moyesha.

	--------------------------

