
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	09-04-1997	

NAME:	NOSIPHO A. MDYOGOLO

		NONZAME E. KOLITI

CASE: 	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 3

___________________________________

COMMISSION COMMENCES WITH PRAYERS.

CHAIRMAN:	On behalf of all of us I wish to convey our deep sense of
gratitude for the minister for leading the devotions for us this morning.
It was very brief, but indeed very touching and very deep. We are going
to proceed in the same fashion as in the past two days in this our last
day here in Grahamstown. We will ask that anyone who cannot understand
Xhosa move to our administrative desk and obtain a set of headphones.

	Those who do understand Xhosa, we will appeal to you to please make
these sets available to those who need them because yesterday there was a
shortage of these headsets. We will use Xhosa for our proceedings mainly
except for those witnesses who prefer to testify in English and we
request those people who have limited or no understanding of Xhosa to
please get the earphones. We request again that those be left on your
seats when you leave after the end of the proceedings or when you decide
to leave the hall.

	Tiny Maya will report to us on the order for today.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Chairperson. Honourable Chairperson, on this our third
and final morning here in Grahamstown, the 9th day of April 1997 I would
like to place before you the list of people who have applied to appear
before this Human Rights Violations Committee of the Truth and
Reconciliation

Commission.

	I am going to place it in the order in which they will appear before you
today. Today we have 28 witnesses who will appear before this Committee,
who will be testifying about two regions, Grahamstown and Fort Beaufort.
Firstly I will read the name of the witness, then the name of the victim
who was violated, the violation, the year and the area in which the
violation took place.

	Firstly Nosipho Angelina Mdyogolo will testify about Mtandazeli Patrick
Mdyogolo who was murdered in Grahamstown in 1985. Nonzame Elizabeth
Koliti will testify about the murder of Nontle Koliti in Grahamstown in
1986.

	Ntombomzi Makafe will speak about an attempted murder on herself in
Grahamstown in 1986. Mava Zolele Rwexu will speak about severe
ill-treatment on herself, the murder of Nonose Hoboshe, Yunguma Priscilla
Hoboshe and Vuyiswwa Hoboshe in 1986 here in Grahamstown.

	Nomakhwezi Georgina Siko will testify about Nontozake Siko's murder in
1985 here in Grahamstown. Bulelwa Florence Xhanga will speak about the
murder of Siphiwo Xhanga in Grahamstown in 1985.

	Nonzima Edna Bikishi will speak about the murder of Phindile Lhelhe
Mbenge in Grahamstown in 1986. Patricia Fundiswa Sukula will speak about
severe ill-treatment, her severe ill-treatment and the murder of
Nontyatyambo Medeline Sandi in Grahamstown in 1986.

	Tenjiwe Quenette Madinda will speak about her severe ill-treatment and
arson in 1986 here in Grahamstown. Timoti Mbuyiselo Pota Mlonyeni will
speak about his severe ill-treatment and arson in Grahamstown in 1986.

	Koloman James Mantile will speak about the murders of

Jane Msuthakazi Matyani and Johnson Pakamile Mantile in

Grahamstown in 1987. Zinakile Eric Peter will speak about Topsy Peter's
murder in Grahamstown in 1987. Misile De Villiers Nondzube will speak
about his severe ill-treatment and arson in Grahamstown in 1987.

	All the following witnesses will be from Fort Beaufort and because they
are all from the same place, I will not mention the name of the place.
Nelson Sakumzi Duma will speak about an attempted murder on himself in
1985. Nowatase Regina Kobese will speak about the murder of Notiti Steven
Kobese in 1984. Nozipho Eunice Siyona will speak about the murder of
Phindile Siyona in 1985.

	Nokhaya Lili Madakane will speak about the murder of Thozamile Swartbooi
Madakana in 1985. Nomatemba Agnes Ndingane will speak about the murder of
Selby Zanemali Ndingane who was murdered in 1985.

	Nosisi Violet Payi will speak about the murder of Bukelwa Notargane Payi
in 1985. Zanyiwe Sylvia Kama will speak about the murder of Lulama Kama
in 1985 and also Xolani Kama. There was an attempted murder on the life
of Zolani.

	Nomtandazo Lydia Kaleniwill speak about the murder of Velile Lennox
Kaleni in 1986. Tembile Alfred Swartboom will speak about his severe
ill-treatment in 1985. Mandla Kaso will speak about his severe
ill-treatment in 1985. Buyiswa Margaret Cekisani will speak about her
torture in 1986.

	Tembeka Nocawe Maki will speak about her torture in 1989. Nkosiyabo
David Ngidla will speak an attempted murder. Kivi William Tyiwa will
speak about an attempted murder on himself. Nokwaka Sylvia Nkwalase will
speak about the murder of Luvyo Loti Nkwalase who was murdered in 1993.

	Millicent Shumikazi Swartbooi will speak about the

murder of Zwelenkomo Alfred Swartbooi who was murdered in 1993. Enoch
Mali will speak about an attempted murder on his life in 1992. Nomsaga
Anet Danster will speak about the murder in 1986 of Neeba Danster. Thank
you very much Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON:	We thank you Ms Maya. We have a long list of people who will
be appearing before the Commission today and we will appeal to everyone
for your cooperation so that we can reach the end of our list in time and
we appeal to you that you maintain discipline and order so that we can
complete our hearings in time. We normally have a set time aside in our
hearings where we observe a moment of silence to pay respect for the
deceased by announcing their names.

	We will now ask that everyone in the house rise, so that we can remember
all those who have passed on. We remember Mtandazeli Patrick mdyogolo,
Nontle Koliti, Nonose Hoboshe, Yunguma Priscilla Hoboshe, Vuyiswa
Hoboshe, Siphiwo Xhanga, Phindile Lhelhe Mbenge, Nontyatyambo Medeline
Sandi, Jane Msuthukazi Matyani, Johnson Pakamile Mantile, Topsy Peter,
and also Notiti Steven Kobese, Phindile Siyona, Thozamile Swartbooi
Madakana, Selby Zanemali Ndingane. And also Bukelwa Notargane Payi,
Lulama Kama, Velile Lennox Kaleni, and also Luvuyo Loti Nkwalase,
Zwelenkomo Alfred Swartbooi as well as Neeba Danster. May their souls and
the souls of all the faithfully departed through the mercy of God, rest
in peace, amen.

	We don't normally introduce people who announce people when we have our
sittings, but we would like to welcome Reverend Lupata who is training
priests of the Anglican Church here in Grahamstown, we would also like to
welcome

Cyril Hartland who is a priest in Fort Beaufort and he is

also the Mayor of Fort Beaufort. We welcome you. We are going to call up
the first people, we will call up Nosipho Angelina Mdyogolo, Nonzame
Elizabeth Koliti. We ask that the two of them step forward.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Chairperson. I would like to swear the witnesses
in, starting with Nosipho Angelina Mdyogolo.

NOSIPHO ANGELINA MDYOGOLO:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you very much.

NONZAME ELIZABETH KOLITI:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you very much. Chairman, the witnesses have been duly
sworn in.

CHAIRPERSON:	Thank you very much you may be seated. We would like to
welcome you here and we are going to ask Mr Sandi to direct questions at
you on behalf of the Commission.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you very much Chairman. I would like us to begin with
Miss Mdyogolo. Miss Mdyogolo you are going to testify about the murder of
Mtandazeli Patrick Mdyogolo who is your brother, is that correct?

MS MDYOGOLO:	Yes, that is correct.

ADV SANDI:	Because we have all the information in statement form before
us, we would like you to just sketch very briefly for us what happened to
this boy in 1985.

MS MDYOGOLO:	Firstly I would like to rectify the year, there is a
mistake. It did not happen in 1985, it happened in 1984.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you very much, we have noted that.

MS MDYOGOLO:	What happened too Mtandazeli is that it was a school day,
although I cannot remember which day it was, he was on his way to school.
He had gone to school and he

came back from school that afternoon, had something to eat and went back
for afternoon studies and at approximately 5 pm he had not come back yet,
because normally they return back to school at 2 pm. We were worried as
to why he had not returned yet and we heard a toyi-toyi march past our
house, move up our street. We were then fairly certain that he was part
of that toyi-toyi because the children back then would join the toyi-toyi
as soon as they heard one.

	At approximately 6 pm the Mdisa family came to our home to tell us that
Mtandazeli had fallen at their house and they had come to fetch us. We
got into Mr Maneli's car and also the Mdisa family car and we went there.
When we got there we found him laying on the ground and they told us that
he came there running and he told them that he had been struck behind his
ear and that he had a headache.

	They asked him what they could do for him and he asked for headache
tablets and said he would like to sleep. They offered him a bed and he
declined that and he said he wanted to lie flat on the ground. They gave
him these headache tablets.

	After a while - they kept checking on him and they found that he was
laying very still and after a while they'd check on him every few minutes
and at some stage they found a greyish fluid flowing out of his nose and
they noticed that there was some hair missing from behind his ear.

	And they then realised that they should come and fetch us because we are
related in some way and we found him laying there like that. This Mr
Maneli that was with the Mdisa family assisted us because he also had a
car and he took us to Settlers Hospital.

	Because those were turbulent times - the 80's were

turbulent times and there were so many toyi-toyi's, police presence and
so forth, it was not easy for us to hear exactly what happened. We just
had to hear it through the grapevine because when we got to the Hospital,
we met up with a Doctor White who told us, basically confirmed that he
was deceased and then after a few days students came to sympathise with
us after having heard that he was dead.

	And we appealed to these students that if anyone of them knew what
happened, they should please tell us. His one friend Whitey told us what
happened and how it had happened. Whitey's version of events was that
they were toyi-toying up M-Street and when they got near the Nqoline
Funeral Parlour the police came and dispersed them with rubber bullets
and tear gas and what Whitey noticed was that while the police were
standing there, Nombenqana and the Boers got out of the police vehicles
and he directed, Nombenqana directed something at them and fired.

	This thing zoomed past Whitey and struck the person in front of him, who
was Mtandazeli and it struck the back of his ear. He fell and Whitey
continued running. Mtandazeli got up and ran into the Mdisa house where
he fell.

ADV SANDI:	Where is Whitey currently?

MS MDYOGOLO:	Because those were such turbulent times and the ANC and
AZAPO were in conflict and he belonged to AZAPO, he was a victim being
sought by the ANC and he had to flee his home, but his mother took him to
his aunt in Cape Town. But he had left here already having made a
statement.

ADV SANDI:	When he left, did he - had he said who had shot at him?

MS MDYOGOLO:	We had not, we were not able to ask too many questions back
then because of the way it was.

ADV SANDI:	Is that Mtandazeli's mother?

MS MDYOGOLO:	Yes.

ADV SANDI:	Who did you say the Attorney was?

MS MDYOGOLO:	We went to Mr Sandi.

ADV SANDI:	Was it not Mr Mpati?

MS MDYOGOLO:	They were in partnership Mr Mpati and Mr Sandi.

ADV SANDI:	What happened in court?

MS MDYOGOLO:	After he had been taken to the Doctor, he was taken in for
an operation. Thereafter he was taken for the post-mortem to be conducted
and we received notices informing us that an inquest was going to be held
and that we should be at court at a certain date.

	We went to court and there were policemen present there who were
testifying before Mr Koti, Nombenqana, saying that they did not do that
because they were not trained to shoot, but at the time when Mr Koti was
to take the witness stand he said that he had been trained in the use of
that firearm and he could shoot, but because the witness Whitey was not
present at court we don't know what became of the matter, that was the
last we heard of it.

ADV SANDI:	And if your presence here today, is there any wish you would
like to express?

MS MDYOGOLO:	Our wish as a family is that this matter be reopened because
what happened back then was confusing to us as a family because of the
way the police handled us, they would come in the morning at 1 am and
harass us and attack us with tear gas, so we did not know exactly what
was happening. We merely buried him because - for the sake of the
formality so we would like this matter to be reopened and be given a
chance. If we could be present that we could

bury Mtandazeli in the dignified manner, befitting him.

ADV SANDI:	In your testimony you said that you would like Mtandazeli's
mother to receive counselling. Could you elaborate on that?

MS MDYOGOLO:	Yes, I requested counselling because after this happened, we
found that she was not herself any more. There are times when she would
just - all this would just come back to her and we felt that perhaps
counselling could help.

ADV SANDI:	Is - are you referring to the same way she behaved a few
minutes ago?

MS MDYOGOLO:	Yes, as soon as she recalls what happened, she becomes
hysterical and sometimes we have to call in other families as well to try
and console her.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you very much Ms Mdyogolo. We would now like to move to
Ms Koliti.

	Ms Koliti, you are here to tell us about Nontle Koliti. Is Nontle your
grandchild or your child?

MS KOLITI:	She was my child.

ADV SANDI:	How old was she at the time?

MS KOLITI:	Nontle was 13 years old at the time.

ADV SANDI:	She was 13 years old?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, she was 13 years old.

ADV SANDI:	She was shot in 1986, is that correct?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, that is correct.

ADV SANDI:	Please tell us Ms Koliti what happened on this particular day.

MS KOLITI:	On this day I was at work. Someone came to fetch me from work,
telling me that Nontle was not well. I was surprised because when I left
home, she was well. My boss let me go. We went home. When I arrived at
home,

there were many people at my house.

	I heard that Nontle was shot and she passed away.

ADV SANDI:	Who shot Nontle?

MS KOLITI:	It was said that it was Mpukumpuku who shot her.

ADV SANDI:	Is Mpukumpuku Khadi who was a policemen?

MS KOLITI:	Yes.

ADV SANDI:	Who was with Mpukumpuku at the time?

MS KOLITI:	When Mpukumpuku shot my daughter, the witnesses said that he
was together with Nombenqana.

ADV SANDI:	Is Nombenqana Mr Koti?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, he Mr Koti.

ADV SANDI:	You said that you consulted at Attorney and this case
proceeded to court. What happened in court?

MS KOLITI:	This case was conducted in court, but I don't remember for how
long. But we were told once that Mpukumpuku had passed away.

ADV SANDI:	Was it the end of the case then?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, it was the end of the case.

ADV SANDI:	Do you have a request to the Commission today so that the
Commission would recommend your request to the President? Did you receive
any money or were you compensated by the Government?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, I did receive an amount of money from an Attorney.

ADV SANDI:	What was this money for? Was it for burial expenses?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, it was for burial expenses.

ADV SANDI:	Do you have something else to add Ms Koliti, concerning this
matter? Is that all you wanted to say?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, that is all.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Ms Koliti, I will hand over to the Chairperson,
thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:	Ms Koliti, your testimony you just presented to this
Commission today, you said that Nontle Koliti was shot by Mpukumpuku?

MS KOLITI:	Yes, sir.

CHAIRPERSON:	You also said that Khadi was present when Nontle was shot?

MS KOLITI:	The witnesses said that Khadi was also present.

CHAIRPERSON:	Who are these witnesses, do you know their names?

MS KOLITI:	It was Nomthumzi.

CHAIRPERSON:	Do you know her surname?

MR KOLITI:	I've forgotten Nomthumzi's surname.

CHAIRPERSON:	We will get back to you so that you can give us the surname
when you've remembered it. What did these witnesses say? Did they say
that Khadi took part in this process? Did he also shoot your daughter?

MS KOLITI:	The witnesses said that these children were playing near the
toilet that morning, it was a quiet morning. Mpukumpuku came and he
stopped the car in K-Street, he went in one yard in K-Street, the back of
this yard is facing the K-Street because we were staying in two streets.

	He then went next to the toilet where the children were playing. The
witness said that she heard a gunshot and Mpukumpuku had already killed
them.

CHAIRPERSON:	When you are speaking of Mpukumpuku, is it the same as Khadi?

MS KOLITI:	Yes.

CHAIRPERSON:	I wanted to ask about Nombenqana Koti. Did he take part in
shooting these people?

MS KOLITI:	No, he did not take part because the witnesses said that
Nombenqana was in the police van.

CHAIRPERSON:	On behalf of the Commission, I would like to thank both of
you for coming here today and to tell us your story. Your story is a
usual story to this Commission because the police used to shoot people at
random. I don't want to say a lot for now, but I would like to inform you
that Nombenqana's lawyers have requested a chance to come here so that
they can answer some of the things that have been raised in these
statements.

	And we will get a chance to ask them questions so that we can find the
truth. We will request you now to go back to your seats so that they can
come up to the stage. Thank you.

	--------------------

	

