	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME: GINETTE NOMPUMELELO MEJANE		

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 1



REVD FINCA:	We welcome you Ginette Mejane. We are going to hand over to
Reverend Xundu to swear you in and then Tiny Maya will lead you.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

GINETTE NOMPUMELELO MEJANE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you.

MS MAYA;	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Hallo Nompumelelo. You are going to
tell us about your brother, Thembile Mejane, is that so? You say that
Thembile was a member of the ANC that was banned at that time, he then
disappeared in Jansenville, then you heard that he was in Port Elizabeth,
is that right?

MS MEJANE:	Yes, it is.

MS MAYA:	How old was Thembile?

MS MEJANE:	He was 29 years of age.

MS MAYA:	Was he working?

MS MEJANE:	Yes, he was working.

MS MAYA:	Did he have a family?

MS MEJANE:	He did not have a wife, but he had one child.

MS MAYA:	Could you briefly tell us how he disappeared and what you heard
after that?

MS MEJANE:	Thank you. It was in 1985, it was terrible at Jansenville,
there were a lot of fights. There were people from the clan name
Matshaweni that were fighting against us at the time.

	The Blue Park was fighting against the Green Park. On

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	GN MEJANE

the 14th of December 1985 it became clear that because of the violence in
our townships, my brother was one of the people that had to leave. On the
14th of December they then had to run away.

	I was 12 years old at the time. My parents were saying that my brother
said he is going to Port Elizabeth, he had previously worked there. After
he went to PE we never saw him again. The 14th of December was the last
time we saw him.

	After about four years, 1989, a man from Jansenville Limba Sthathu came
back. He had also left in 1985. He told us that my brother had been shot
in Angola in 1985. My parents tried to find out what had happened. The
answer was my brother was one of the people that would take food from
camp to camp and he got shot whilst doing that.

MS MAYA:	Did you find out who shot him?

MS MEJANE:	No. Limba himself did not give us the details. He did not give
us a full report. My parents did not ask him too many questions either.

MS MAYA:	Where is Limba?

MS MEJANE:	Apparently he is in George.

MS MAYA:	Did you try as a family again to find out what happened to your
brother?

MS MEJANE:	When my mother was still alive, either in 1987 or 1988, she
tried to work together with the people from Black Sash, Sheila was still
there. She wrote to them requesting that they should look for her son.

	They did not find anything.

MS MAYA:	Could you tell us more about the violence within the community
because you said that when your brother disappeared, there was conflict
within the community

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	GN MEJANE

especially with one particular family.

MS MEJANE:	We refer to these people as the Matshawe's. They were against
the struggle. They were against us toyi-toying.

MS MAYA:	Is this family still alive, what is happening? How are the two
sides reconciled?

MS MEJANE;	No, there is peace at the moment. Some were in prisons.

MS MAYA:	Where is your brother's child now?

MS MEJANE:	He is at home.

MS MAYA:	Is he at school?

MS MEJANE:	Yes, he is at school.

MS MAYA:	How old is he?

MS MEJANE:	He is 18.

MS MAYA:	What standard is he doing?

MS MEJANE:	He is doing standard 7.

MS MAYA:	Is there something else or perhaps a request that you have to
the Commission?

MS MEJANE:	No, there is nothing.

MS MAYA:	Your request to the Commission perhaps as a family?

MS MEJANE:	As I am the one who is looking after the family, my father
works away from home, my other brother is in Port Elizabeth, my mother
passed away in 1992, my sister works in farms in Jansenville, I have a
brother staying at home.

	I request that the ANC looks after my nephew. If they could educate him.
We are struggling as a family and my father is quite elderly. Could the
ANC investigate deeply and find out exactly what happened to my brother?

	Even if it is just his remains, if we could get his

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	GN MEJANE

remains or perhaps where he was buried, we would like to see.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Nompumelelo. I'll hand you over to Mr Chairperson,
maybe he has a few questions for you. (tape ends)

REVD FINCA:	Before I talk to you specifically Nompumelelo, won't you
please clarify a few things to me. The report that we got that your
brother passed away transporting food from one camp to another, was he
shot by the enemy, was he shot by members of the ANC? Exactly what
happened?

MS MEJANE:	According to Limba's report he was shot by the enemy because
Limba said there was a car that was driving behind them. Therefor the
bullet was from this car that was driving behind them, therefor I would
say it is the enemy.

REVD FINCA:	After the ANC was unbanned and there were ANC offices at the
Shell House in each region, did you try to find out from the ANC what
happened exactly to your brother?

MS MEJANE:	No sir.

REVD FINCA:	And there was no one who came to you from the ANC offices to
tell you what happened?

MS MEJANE:	No, nobody came.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Nompumelelo. You look very young, but we can see
that you are trying to be a mother at home and you look determined to
find out what happened to your brother.

	I have said to a lady that was testifying here, the pain and the grief
of children who were in the struggle who left the country, some came
back, some did not. As a Commission it is very painful that there would
be no report

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	

from the African National Congress to the families of those who lost
loved ones.

	If your brother was killed by the enemy, the ANC should have immediately
informed the family. We will be serious about this matter and we will
investigate about your brother's death.

	At least we will not be starting from scratch because you have told us
he was shot transporting food from one camp to another.

	We will endeavour to give clarity to you. We have noted your request
that your brother be buried at home if possible. Thank you. We are happy
that your family has a child like you.

	--------------------

