
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	07 APRIL 1997	

NAME:	EDWARD GUGWANA MENZI

		MBULELO MENZI

CASE:		EC0468/96 	-	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 1

____________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We will ask Edward Gugwana Menzi to come forward. Who is
Edward? Thank you, and who are you, Sir.

MR M MENZI: I am Mbulelo Menzi.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you going to testify in support of Edward?

MR M MENZI: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: We will ask Reverend Xundu to help you take an oath and lead
you with questions on behalf of the Commission.

EDWARD GUGWANA MENZI: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you.

MBULELO MENZI: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you. I will now ask you questions. Briefly, I would like
you to give me a picture of what was happening at that time so that I can
ask questions.

MR E G MENZI: In 1986 in Cookhouse there was an organisation by the name
of KORA. The organisation was launched in 1985 by the community. In 1986
we were together with the Kakana family in this organisation. The Kakana
family had their meetings and the community did not like that. Mr Kakana
had, was the owner of a shop and one, Mr Xhalanga, also had a shop. He
was together with them. People were told not to buy in Xhalanga's shop
and Kakana's shop. As I was also having a shop they thought that I was
the one who influenced people not to buy in their shops.

	On the 27th of February in 1986, this young man next to me, Mbulelo,
called me and he say, father, in Xhalanga's shop he heard a gossip about
me, but he did not tell me exactly what was said. As we were in the shop
with my wife, together with Mangoweni's boy, young men came. I asked them
what was happening. They said that they were seeing Kakana's family. As I
was still looking at that I saw a group of men coming in. I did not see
what they had in their hands. I looked at them, they took out their
weapons. Some had pangas and hammers. There was Xolisile and Sicuku
Jantjies. They came to me with their weapons. I ran to the storeroom. I
took one empty drink bottle. I did not want to give them my bag. I ran to
a corner, but I thought that that will not help me, I must go back to
them. I fell down, they came to me and they stabbed me in the back. I was
dizzy at that time. There was one of them, Boom, with a sword and he
stabbed me in the back. I fell down.

REV XUNDU: In the community there was an AZAPO and UDF, is that so?

MR E G MENZI: They were calling themselves AZAPO.

REV XUNDU: Was it recently?

MR E G MENZI: Yes, it was a recent thing.

REV XUNDU: You said that you were belonging to a same organisation KORA?

MR E G MENZI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: But they have changed and they called themselves AZAPO?

MR E G MENZI: Yes, they had their own meetings and they called themselves
AZAPO members.

REV XUNDU: You mentioned Xhalanga. Was he in connection with the police?

MR E G MENZI: Yes, Xhalanga had a connection with the police. There is a
bridge from Cookhouse. One day I was passing in that bridge. He was there
with the police. I decided to go back. When I was going back the police
van was leaving. I met him in one meeting because he was attending our
meetings. He said to me, you saw me when I was talking to the police. I
said, yes. He said that the police wanted to know our involvement in the
organisation. I could see that he was just trying to cover for himself.

REV XUNDU: Was AZAPO a launched organisation there?

MR E G MENZI: I do not know about that.

REV XUNDU: Did you have a position in the UDF?

MR E G MENZI: No, I was just a member of this Cradock organisation.

REV XUNDU: Were you a Chairperson?

MR E G MENZI: No, I was just a member.

REV XUNDU: This conflict divided people in the community. Others were
AZAPO members and others were UDF members.

MR E G MENZI: People who were members of AZAPO were Kakana family and
Sicuku Jantjies.

REV XUNDU: When these people were assaulting Nomakhaya Shlanya, please
tell us about this day.

MR E G MENZI: When I went out of the storeroom, it was the same day, I
met people outside. I asked them to give me a towel to bandage my head.
They gave me a towel. I asked where my wife was. They told me she was in
the shop. When I went in the shop I saw a pool of blood. She was lying
down. I decided to follow these people. I went to my house looking for my
own weapons. Thosameli Sigwebu came, he said that you are injured. He
took my wife to hospital. He said that I must go to hospital because I
was injured. I then agreed, he took me to hospital and I was told that
Nomakhaya died.

REV XUNDU: Did the police come to take statements to you?

MR E G MENZI: The police came the following day when I was coming from
the hospital. It was on the 28th. When I arrived at the hospital I was
told my wife had passed away. I was released the following morning by the
doctor. When I arrived at home the police came. They asked me how I felt.
I said I was still in pain. They told me when I was feeling better I must
go to the police station to tell them what happened. I wanted to know at
home what happened when I left. They told me that the police did not
come. They came at night at about 12, because Kakana Dickie was shot.
They took this Dickie with a van. It was then that the police came. I was
not there, but my boy told me. I could see that the police did not care,
because they did not come when we were injured, they only came when
Dickie was injured. One police came, Blackies, came to me saying that I
must give them a statement. I told him I am not going to do that, I want
another police to come.

REV XUNDU: Did that police come?

MR E G MENZI: No, but he met my son. He asked a statement from my son and
that was the end of it.

REV XUNDU: Was there a court case?

MR E G MENZI: No.

REV XUNDU: Did you go to any Attorneys?

MR E G MENZI: No.

REV XUNDU: The people who entered your shop, did you know all of them?

MR E G MENZI: I know Boom, Sicuku Jantjies, Kolisile, Kakana, Mpendulo
Kakana, Mongamela Kakana, Madusa Kakana. Those were the ones who came in
the shop.

REV XUNDU: You buried your wife?

MR E G MENZI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Were you disrupted by the police?

MR E G MENZI: No, but they were just there to observe.

REV XUNDU: After that you went back to your normal lives?

MR E G MENZI: After the funeral the community decided to chase away the
Kakana family from the township. They stayed near the police station.
Their shops were burnt, Xhalanga's shop and Kakana's shop. The people
from the community could not go near the police station because they
would be harassed by these two families. People were not allowed to or
have weapons, but the Kakana family had weapons. There were people like
Madusa who were killed.

REV XUNDU: After all this did the Kakana family go back to the township?

MR E G MENZI: Yes, they came back to the township at the time of the
State of Emergency. I heard that they had a high fence so that the people
from the community cannot go in. They came to me, the woman of Kakana's
family, came to me to apologise.

REV XUNDU: Are you still in Cookhouse?

MR E G MENZI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Still continuing with your shop?

MR E G MENZI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: The ones who came to you, who assaulted you, did they come to
apologise to you, these men you have just mentioned?

MR E G MENZI: No, some of them are in Fort Beaufort, some of them have
passed away, but they did not come to me to apologise.

REV XUNDU: Only their wives came to you to apologise. You, as men, you
still have conflict?

MR E G MENZI: I am not satisfied, because the people who assaulted me did
not come to me and apologise.

REV XUNDU: The police that took statement from your son, what did they do?

MR E G MENZI: They did nothing, they just took a statement from my son.

REV XUNDU: What is your request to the Commission?

MR E G MENZI: My request to the Commission, as we were being chased away,
there were people who were hired, they were known as "Specials". One of
them is a policeman today. I would like the Government to do something
about these people, because they were hired by the past Government.

REV XUNDU: You said that he is here?

MR E G MENZI: Yes, he is here.

REV XUNDU: What did you say about these people.

MR E G MENZI: I said that the Government must see what to do about these
people.

REV XUNDU: Except for that, what is your other request?

MR E G MENZI: There is nothing.

REV XUNDU: Is there peace amongst you and the families of these people?

MR E G MENZI: We are happy, there is no conflict.

REV XUNDU: Mbulelo, do you have anything else to add in your father's
story?

MR M MENZI: What I would like the Commission to do, as this was a very
painful thing that happened to us, if one can sit down and watch what was
happening, it was like a butchery, because there was blood all over. My
mother left two young children, they need their mother, they need the
discipline, to be disciplined by their mother. I would like the
Commission to prosecute the people, the perpetrators, because if you say
you forgive them, but you have a grudge, that will not be acceptable.

REV XUNDU: In other words, you say that these people must be brought
forward to the Law.

MR M MENZI: Yes.

REV XUNDU: Is that all?

MR M MENZI: Yes, that is all, Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you, Mr Menzi, and you, Mbulelo. This must have
been a very painful day to you. Your wife was killed, you were also badly
injured and you nearly died. This is clearly a painful day for you, but I
do not want to comment beyond that at this stage. I would like to call
the next witnesses who will be giving us the other side of the story. For
now, we thank you.

	------------------------------

