
			

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 26/28-08-96		NAME: ROSEY NOCAWE MHLAWULI

CASE: EC /96		UITENHAGE

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: . . . . . Thank you Mr Chairperson and can I lead Nocawe
into an oath.

ROSEY NOCAWE MHLAWULI: (Sworn duly states)

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Rosey Mhlawuli we welcome you before this Commission and
we thank you that you have availed yourself on behalf of Thobile Busakwe.
We are now going to hand you over to Ms Pumla Madikizela-Gobodo who is
going to lead you with questions on behalf of this Commission. Over to
you Pumla.

MS GOBODO: Thank you Mr Chairperson.

	We greet you Nocawe. We did talk earlier on. Could you explain to us how
you were affected and shot by the police as you were going round with
Thobile's mother to investigate about Thobile's matter. Could you please
first explain to us when this incident happened in 1986, where were you
staying?

MRS MHLAWULI: I was staying in 7th Avenue, in Despatch.

MS GOBODO: Is that a small town nearby here, Uitenhage?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes.

MS GOBODO: What was happening in Uitenhage at the time. What was the
atmosphere at the time?

MRS MHLAWULI: It was very bad, it was the time when children were dying
and on this particular night, Thobile Busakwe's mother came to me at
2.00am and knocked at our door. We opened for her and she said the police
had just left her house and they had come to take Thobile Busakwe 's
identity document. He wanted to go and check in the hall as to what
Thobile had actually done, because he thought that perhaps Thobile had
done something wrong in the hall.

	I decided to accompany her.

MS GOBODO: So you say Thobile's mother could not hear properly?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes.

MS GOBODO: She came to you as a neighbour after the police had come to
demand Thobile's identity document?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes.

MS GOBODO: Was it the usual practice that the policemen should come and
demand identity documents that belonged to children at that time.

MRS MHLAWULI: No. We were shocked as a result. That is why we thought
Thobile had done something at the hall which was the reason why we went
to the hall and at the hall he was not there.

	This hall was not very far from the place of the Chaka policemen. In the
hall there was a discotheque and so we decided to go to the Chaka
policemen where Thobile's mother was going to tell them that Thobile had
disappeared.

MS GOBODO: Now, you say the Tshaka's had an office there in the location,
was it an office for the police called the "Ama Tshaka".

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes.

MS GOBODO: Is that were you went them that you could not find Thobile?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes. So these policemen said we should go to the charge
office and they were preparing, but we did not know that they were
preparing to shoot us.

	I could hear them shuffling and we decided to run into the street to the
car we had parked quite a distance from this office.

	There were loud shots and I was hit all over the body, at the back and I
didn't know what had happened to Thobile's mother because I was all by
myself in the street.

	As I was getting into the car, I turned and then I was hit just behind
the ear with a bullet and I was bleeding profusely. I sat there and I was
terrified in a very bad way, then my daughter came and asked "Were are
you sissy, are you not injured", I said "No, they have shot me", then I
said, "Please speak softly because they are now going to arrest me and
send me to jail", so we moved on.

MS GOBODO: Did you go to your house?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes.

MS GOBODO: As you were saying your daughter should not speak loudly
because you were terrified that if they had seen that you had been
injured they were going to arrest you and lock you in?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes. So we went to the house and I was very thirsty and
then my sister said I should not drink because people had the belief that
if were to drink water, I was going to die so I slept in one of the
bedrooms and at night, my cousin-brother lifted me up.

	They wanted to take me to a doctor but I was refusing. I was very scared
that the policemen were going to get hold of me and therefore I decided
to sleep with the intention that I would go to the doctor the following
morning.

	I went to Dr Mzimba who was very helpful. He did not even accept the
examination fee from us and he kept on helping me and he gave me a
medical certificate so that I could not go to work. Every Saturday I
would go to him for treatment and he would say all these pellets were
going to simply come out on their own.

MS GOBODO: Could you explain to us, I would like to tell this gathering
that I did see the marks where there were these pellets just before you
came here. There are several other things that I noted.

	Firstly, is that you were scared to go and consult a doctor because that
was going to put you into some disadvantage to be arrested by the police,
so you had to bear the pain because you were frightened?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes, I was frightened because the police were aware that
they had shot me and so they would get hold of me and throw me into jail.

MS GOBODO: What was actually happening to the people if they were found
injured. What did the police do to the people?

MRS MHLAWULI: They would take them to jail instead of taking them to
hospital and then you would be kept there in jail and perhaps by chance
you would be taken to the hospital and some people would even die there.
If you were discharged from hospital you would be taken back to jail,
that is why I opted to go to Dr Mzimba.

MS GOBODO: The second thing you mentioned was that you opted not to tell
your problem at work. You had to give an excuse that you were suffering
from flu, as you were supported by Dr Mzimba. Is it you who made this
request to the doctor?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes, because I was frightened that at work they would even
expel me.

MS GOBODO: How were you working at work?

MRS MHLAWULI: I was working very badly because I was limping and then the
matron asked me one day "I heard that you have a wound, you have been
shot", and I denied, but what gave me away was that I was limping on both
legs, but fortunately they did not actually spot me. I then decided to
leave work.

	I couldn't even stand, I couldn't walk, I had to relax and really, I was
liable to be dismissed at work.

MS GOBODO: I understand we are talking about you, but Thobile's name has
been mentioned, I would ask you to tell us what happened to Thobile?

MRS MHLAWULI: Thobile was buried very painfully because on that they many
people were being arrested and there was a restriction that the people at
the funeral should not exceed 100 in number.

	Some children were being beaten with sjamboks and bats, it was just
policemen all over when Thobile was being buried.

MS GOBODO: So, Thobile's funeral was a huge funeral?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes, but we couldn't go to the funeral because people were
turned back. Some were arrested, some were beaten up, it was just very
serious. We still remember, we remember some of the people died, they
were shot at the times of the funerals. We remember all those incidents.

MS GOBODO: What is the name of Thobile's mother?

MRS MHLAWULI: She is Nomsindo Klaas.

MS GOBODO: How many children did she have?

MRS MHLAWULI: She had one child, Thobile.

MS GOBODO: So, the only child was killed?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes.

MS GOBODO: So now when they asked for Thobile's reference book, was he
dead or was he still alive?

MRS MHLAWULI: No. He was dead, because we heard of it in the morning that
Thobile had died. They asked for his identity document only because they
wanted to make sure that it was him who had died.

MS GOBODO: I am now going to ask you the last question and then hand you
over to other member. What are your wishes now that you have appeared
before this Commission.

MRS MHLAWULI: I really can't tell, but I would say, if I were to get some
pension because I can never be able to work.

MS GOBODO: Was there any court case opened about what happened to you?

MRS MHLAWULI: No. There wasn't.

MS GOBODO: You just decided to sit because you were scared?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes, I was. Even consulting doctors, I have never been
since that time I last consulted Dr Mzimba and I went to hospital once
and I explained what had happened to me and I was frightened, even then.

MS GOBODO: Can Thobile's mother give evidence about your shooting?

MRS MHLAWULI: Yes, she can.

MS GOBODO: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much Pumla.

	Are there any questions?

	Mrs Mhlawuli we thank you for your story as presented before this
Commission and we promise that we are going to make a follow up like all
other incidents.

	If there are any other things we would like to be clear about, we are
going to call you, for now everything is clear. We thank you.

	--------------------





