	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		24.09.1996	NAME: MERIAM MMOLAWA

CASE NUMBER: 01530 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 2

_________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mmolawa, good morning and welcome to you. Can you hear me?

MRS MMOLAWA: Yes, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Are you comfortable?

MRS MMOLAWA: Yes, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mmolawa, can you please introduce the young man who is
accompanying you this morning?

MRS MMOLAWA: That's my son, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

MRS MMOLAWA: Ezekiel Mmolawa.

DR RANDERA: Okay. I welcome Ezekiel too. Mrs Mmolawa, will you please
stand to take the oath.

MERIAM MMOLAWA: (Duly sworn, states).

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mmolawa, Adv Denzil Potgieter is going to be helping you
in telling your story and I hand over to him. Thank you.

ADV POTGIETER: Thank you, Dr Randera. Good morning, Mrs Mmolawa. Welcome
again. Can I just find out, we have a statement from yourself and it
concerns the torture and detention of your son, Ezekiel who is with you
today. But I don't have in my possession a statement from Ezekiel
himself. Did he actually give a statement to the Commission or did he not?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	M MMOLAWA

MRS MMOLAWA: He didn't do that, it is me who did that.

ADV POTGIETER: And insofar as you are concerned, you have really only
heard what happened to him, you only heard about the torture. Not so?

MRS MMOLAWA: Yes, that is true.

ADV POTGIETER: That has in fact occurred to me when I read through your
statement, and I was thinking that Ezekiel is obviously the best person
to tell us what happened. It depends on what the Chairperson's view is,
but it might be a similar case to the earlier one where we might have to
take the testimony of Ezekiel, but before we deal with that, will he be
able, if the Chairperson were to allow that, would he be able to give us
testimony today? Is he in a position to tell us today, is there anything
wrong with him?

MRS MMOLAWA: He will be able to do that, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Perhaps just a minute, perhaps we must just hear what the
Chairperson's view is on this.

CHAIRPERSON: I think that as Ezekiel is here today, it would be in a
sense an incomplete story if whilst we are having him her, we are not
able to hear from him directly. What I will however hsay is that that is
subject to our statement-takers taking his statement immediately he gives
his testimony. So you can swear him in, Faizel.

DR RANDERA: Can you hear me, Ezekiel?

MR MMOLAWA: Yes, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Can you please stand to take the oath.

EZEKIEL MMOLAWA: (Duly sworn, states).

DR RANDERA: Thank you, Ezekiel.

ADV POTGIETER: Thank you once again, Dr Randera, Chairperson. Mrs
Mmolawa, I think let's start with you. We will take your evidence first
and then Ezekiel can just fill KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	M MMOLAWA

in the picture as to what exactly happened. Would you like to tell us
about his arrest and when they took him away from home.

MRS MMOLAWA: It was in 1993, in June, it was on a Tuesday. White people
came. They came to my home. They surrounded the whole house, at the front
and at the back. They were kicking the doors and the windows. They were
torching us with their torches at night whilst we were asleep. They told
me to open. When they asked me to open they said they are police people.
When I opened, White people entered the house with balaclavas. They
entered roughly and they light us up with torches. Then they said we want
your son. When I was still looking the Black one came again. That Black
one, I halt him, he was a CID. Then I said Ezekiel is in the bedroom.
Then they said he must put on his clothes quickly, because they want him.
I asked them where they are taking him to. Then they told me that they
are going to hit him. Then I was frightened and then I closed the door.

	The following day, it was in the morning, at about three o'clock, I went
to investigate where he is. Then they said I should go to the police
station, because they were having balaclavas I couldn't identify them. We
went to the police station. At the police station they said my child is
not there. Whilst I was preparing myself to come back they said they came
back from Orkney, they come from the scrapyards.

	Then when I asked my son what he was doing there. He told me that they
were beating him in the dark on the ear with the clips and fists. Then he
had an ear problem. Then I took him to the doctor. They only kept him in
the hospital for that day. They wanted bail of R100,00. I paid KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	M MMOLAWA

that R100,00 bail.

	Thereafter the case ran for three days, but there were no court
proceedings, they were just postponing the case. The court procedure
completed in 1995, December. That's when the case ended. During that time
I was taken him to various doctors.

ADV POTGIETER: Mrs Mmolawa, you live in Lebaleng, is it correct?

MRS MMOLAWA: Yes, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: In June of 1993 what was the situation in the township
like? In fact, to assist you, in your statement you refer to the shooting
of Joe Olifant, it is a case that we will hear later on in the day. What
was the situation like?

MRS MMOLAWA: The police were coming during the night. They were making it
possible to make it safe for the principal. Then the following day it was
that my son was arrested.

ADV POTGIETER: You seem to have referred to this in your statement, that
there was a situation of unrest in the township at this time, in June
1993. It was shortly after the killing of Joel Olifant.

MRS MMOLAWA: That is immediately after the death of Olifant. The day
after Joe Olifant's funeral.

ADV POTGIETER: The court case that your son, Ezekiel, was involved in,
subsequently, what was that about? Was it about the burning of the school
or what?

MRS MMOLAWA: They alleged that they were stoning the school.

ADV POTGIETER: What happened to that case?

MRS MMOLAWA: The case just ended somewhere, we don't know.

ADV POTGIETER: How old was Ezekiel in 1993 when

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	M MMOLAWA

this happened?

MRS MMOLAWA: Can you repeat your question, Sir?

ADV POTGIETER: How old was Ezekiel in 1993 when this happened?

MRS MMOLAWA: He was 20 years old, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Thank you, Mrs Mmolawa. I am going to ask Ezekiel
questions first and it might be that my colleagues would want to ask you
some questions afterwards. But I am now going to ask for the microphone
to be moved to Ezekiel and we will listen to his evidence.

	Ezekiel, morning, welcome. Can you hear me?

MR MMOLAWA: Yes, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Good. Now from the information in our possession here, it
appears as if you were arrested at home on the 1st of June in 1993. Is
that so?

MRS MMOLAWA: Yes, it is true, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: And do you know the police that came to arrest you? In
fact, your mother said that some of them were wearing balaclavas.

MR MMOLAWA: I don't know them, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: There was also a, from your - from the testimony of your
mother's it appears there was a Black policeman present as well, when you
were arrested at home. Do you know him?

MR MMOLAWA: I know him, sir.

ADV POTGIETER: What is his name?

MR MMOLAWA: His name Sipetlo. Steve Sipetlo.

ADV POTGIETER: Was he a policeman where, at Makwassie, Makwassie police
station?

MR MMOLAWA: He is a CID at Klerksdorp, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Now would you like to tell us, Ezekiel, what KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	M MMOLAWA

happened when the police came to your house there and they took you away?
Tell us exactly what happened.

MR MMOLAWA: When the police came to arrest me at home, we were many who
were arrested. There was a house next-door, which is a double-storey
house. I only heard the sounds of the vans. I thought maybe the Kombi is
for the owner of tha house. After that I heard many sounds. When I looked
outside I saw police vans and Kombis. Thereafter I went to my mother. I
said people are wearing balaclavas and after that they knocked at the
door and they broke the windows. Thereafter my mother opened the door for
them and then they said they wanted Ezekiel. They came to my bedroom and
they found me there, I was asleep. Then the CID whom I know, then said to
me come, let's go. He was together with other White CIDs.

	After that one boy came to the police station. When I get into the Kombi
...

	We went to look for Sete, he wasn't at home. Then we left for the police
station. They filled their car with petrol and they drove to the
scrapyard. They assaulted us in a very dark room. They were hitting me on
my ears, but I cannot identify who it was hitting me on the ears.

	At about six o'clock in the morning they wanted us to write our
statements. They said that we should agree that we broke the principal's
house. I said to them no, I was present in the township, but I was not
present when the house was stoned. They sent us back to Makwassie police
station and they said R300,00 bail or three days.

ADV POTGIETER: Were you then charged?

MR MMOLAWA: Yes, I was charged.

ADV POTGIETER: What did they say what charge was it, what

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	M MMOLAWA

was it you were supposed to have done?

MR MMOLAWA: They said I was stoning the police station, but I must say I
can't remember what the name was, but the police in the township pointed
out people whom they alleged they have seen throwing stones, and one
policeman from Makwassie pointed me out. He was not present when a group
of CIDs got into the house, he remained in the Kombi. I know him. He
stays at Motseng, in Makwassie.

ADV POTGIETER: And what happened to the charge against you, what happened
to the case?

MR MMOLAWA: We were given five years of hard labour outside.

ADV POTGIETER: Now when this happened in 1993, what were you doing, were
you at school, were you working?

MR MMOLAWA: I am self-employed, I wasn't at school.

ADV POTGIETER: And we have heard that there was some unrest in the
township at that time, that was just after the shooting incident
involving Joel Olifant.

MR MMOLAWA: We stay in one street with the person who has been shot, in
the same street.

ADV POTGIETER: Were you politically involved, politically active?

MR MMOLAWA: Yes, I was active.

ADV POTGIETER: What sort of a structure, what organisation?

MR MMOLAWA: The ANC.

ADV POTGIETER: Now can we just come to the incident where you were
assaulted. Did you say that you were taken to the scrapyard?

MR MMOLAWA: Yes, they took us to the scrapyard.

ADV POTGIETER: Where is that?

MR MMOLAWA: At Orkney.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	M MMOLAWA

ADV POTGIETER: Do you know, was it the police that took you there?

MR MMOLAWA: The CIDs, with balaclavas took us there. I know only one of
them who was the Black man, but there were three other Blacks whom I do
not know.

ADV POTGIETER: Was this Steve Sepetlo that you referred to earlier, was
he also present in this group that took you to the scrapyard?

MR MMOLAWA: He was present when they took me to the scrapyard.

ADV POTGIETER: And there you say that you were assaulted, you were beaten
on your ears. With what were you beaten on your ears?

MR MMOLAWA: They were using their hands, they were slapping me on the
ears.

ADV POTGIETER: Were you assaulted in any other way?

MR MMOLAWA: No, they were just using their hands to slap me.

ADV POTGIETER: What was the consequence of that assault, what was the
consequence of being beaten on your ears?

MR MMOLAWA: My ear was badly injured, the ear-drum.

ADV POTGIETER: And what is the condition of your ears at present?

MR MMOLAWA: It is not that fine yet, because I usually have pain in my
ear.

ADV POTGIETER: What is your hearing like today?

MR MMOLAWA: At times that ear-drum just closes itself, I don't hear
anything, but at times I do hear.

ADV POTGIETER: Have you instituted any claims against the police for the
assault and the incident?

MR MMOLAWA: No, Sir.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	M MMOLAWA

ADV POTGIETER: Is there anything else that you wish to add to your
evidence before I finish off?

MR MMOLAWA: No, Sir, there is nothing I want to say further.

ADV POTGIETER: Thank you very much. Thank you, Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Dr Randera will ask you some questions.

DR RANDERA: Ezekiel, I just want to come back to that night, both you and
your mother say that everybody wore balaclavas and that your mother
recognised the voice of one person and you recognised the voice of that
same person. This person called Steve. Now did these people actually
identify themselves at any time, either at your house or in the
scrapyard, in the room where you were tortured, as policemen or CID
people or whatever?

MR MMOLAWA: They didn't introduce themselves in any way. I only saw Steve
because I know that he is a CID. Then I thought that all of them are CIDs.

DR RANDERA: Did you see Steve or you recognised his voice?

MR MMOLAWA: I saw him, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Now I just want to also ask you about the court case. You say
that you were charged. What was the charge?

MR MMOLAWA: They say my charge is breaking the school quarters where the
principal was staying.

DR RANDERA: And you were sentenced to five years?

MR MMOLAWA: Yes, Sir.

DR RANDERA: How much of that time did you actually serve?

MR MMOLAWA: Five years punishment.

DR RANDERA: It was a suspended sentence, was it?

MR MMOLAWA: I was outside, Sir.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	M MMOLAWA

DR RANDERA: I want to come back to this incident about the principal and
the school. It seems like the youth or the comrades actually targeted
schools at that time. Is that right?

MR MMOLAWA: The people who attacked the school are the students.

DR RANDERA: You were falsely accused?

MR MMOLAWA: Yes, I was falsely accused because I was not even there.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

PROF MEIRING: Ezekiel, just two short questions for our records. When did
you leave school, at what standard?

MR MMOLAWA: I left school in 1983 becaue I was sick. I was doing Std 4 at
that time.

PROF MEIRING: You say that you are self-employed. What do you do for a
living?

MR MMOLAWA: I am doing electronic and welding, electrician.

PROF MEIRING: Did you receive training for that?

MR MMOLAWA: No, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Ezekiel, I just want to ask you two questions. When you were
charged, were you charged by yourself or in a group with a whole number
of other people?

MR MMOLAWA: I was in a group of other people, we were six all of us.

CHAIRPERSON: Were you charged with public violence or were you charged
with breaking and entering property? Could you be more specific?

MR MMOLAWA: It was public violence.

CHAIRPERSON: How much time did you actually spend in jail? Not your
sentence, how long did you spend in jail.

MR MMOLAWA: I only stayed three days.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	M MMOLAWA

CHAIRPERSON: And you had a suspended sentence, that if you did that again
you would go to jail for five years.

MR MMOLAWA: That's true.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Thank you - Dr Randera wants to ask another
question.

DR RANDERA: Sorry, Ezekiel, who represented you in that court case, who
was the lawyer?

MR MMOLAWA: That's Schoeman, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Ezekiel, and thank you, Mrs Mmolawa for coming
today. Thank you for sharing that story with us. We know there was a time
in our country when people were charged, youngsters, particularly were
charged with public violence and thrown into jail. And that a lot of
things were done to them and many of them bear the scars of that today.
In your case, Ezekiel, has a problem with his ear, which will probably be
there for a very, very long time. It is the legacy of the past that we
have actually gone through.

	What is disquieting however, is that we rely on certain institutions to
protect us, and the fact that were nameless and faceless people who came
into your homes, into your communities and who took police away, means
that it is very, very difficult for us to understand why these things
happened in that particular way. But one of the jobs that we have to do,
is to make sure that people are never able to act in that way again, that
if they come to your home to take you away, they must have the proper
documentation and they must have the proper authorisation to do these
things. Part of the job in our country is rebuilding all these structures.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	12	M MMOLAWA

	Your story shows that lots of things happened which even we don't really
know about. We will try to see what can be done about Ezekiel's ear, but
thank you for sharing that with us.







	-----------















































KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

