
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION PRIVATE

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	11 JUNE 1997		

NAME:	VUYANI MNGAZA	

CASE:		EC0068/96ELN	-	MDANTSANE

DAY:		3

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------

CHAIRPERSON: We will ask Vuyani Mngaza to come forward.

ADV SANDI: Number.

CHAIRPERSON: Number ten in our list. Welcome Vuyani Mngaza. You will be

sworn in by Reverend Xundu so that you can give your evidence under oath.

VUYANI MNGAZA: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Sandi will lead you in evidence.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Mngaza, your story goes back a
long

way, from 1960, actually 1963, being tortured, being ill-treated, you
lost your

business. We were in great debt and so forth. Let us start as thus, Mr
Mngaza. You

were a PAC member in 1963?

MR MNGAZA: Yes Sir.

ADV SANDI: Arrested because you were active in the PAC military wing?

MR MNGAZA: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Bhoqo, was it a PAC wing?

MR MNGAZA: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Let me hand over to you. Could you tell us your story without

interruption.

MR MNGAZA: Thank you Mr Chairperson. In our, I will start with the 1963

incident so that we can hurry. I was arrested on the eighth of April
1963, arrested in

the morning at two am, having completed a task force function in the
Transkei. We

were all over Transkei, but the Security Branch officers were following
us. We got to

my business place. Some Comrades were left behind.

ADV SANDI: Are you talking about your garage?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, Pan African Motors at that time. My duty, especially in

underground operations of the PAC, I had to co-ordinate our activities
from Maseru

to Cape Town. As I had a business they would send the Comrades to me. I
would

help them as much as I could in whatever they needed. We did a lot of
work in my

garage, making firearms, because as PAC members we were going to start a

revolution in 1963.

ADV SANDI: Without disturbing you, what kind of weapons are you talking
about?

MR MNGAZA: Pangas and weapons that were going to damage the Security
Forces,

because we were going to fight them. We wanted to liberate our people
from the

oppression of the Boers. We did our work. We had to co-ordinate sending
weapons

all over.

ADV SANDI: You were arrested in that process?

MR MNGAZA: Donald Card came at two am. He arrested me from home. Some,

he missed some Comrades that were in my garage sleeping.

ADV SANDI: Is this the time you ended up in a seven month detention in

Cambridge?

MR MNGAZA: Yes.

ADV SANDI: In those seven months did you go before the Court of Law?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, twice actually. They kept on postponing the case until we
were

granted bail. There were other Comrades that I had worked with. They
divided us. I

was in solitary confinement. My, the charge was then withdrawn.

ADV SANDI: You were re-arrested. When was that?

MR MNGAZA: After my case had been withdrawn I was led by Card to a 90 day

detention. The Law had just been established.

ADV SANDI: Are you saying that you were the first victims of the 90 day
detention?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, we were the first victims.

ADV SANDI: What happened at the 90 day detention? Could you tell us about
the

form of torture you experienced.

MR MNGAZA: After they had taken me from Fleet Street Charge Office I was
taken

to the Cambridge Police Station. On the way, it was Sergeant Card who was
in the

car. I do not remember the others, but I think Scheepers was there. They
asked me to

work with them. They offered me everything including a passport. I said I
could not

do that. Nobody was ever a policeman at home. I was not going to be a
policeman.

They put me in solitary confinement in Cambridge.

ADV SANDI: How long were you detained Mr Mngaza?

MR MNGAZA: I was in solitary confinement for a week. They would call me in

during that week. They would interrogate me in connection with the work
we were

doing. They were not satisfied, because I was not divulging anything.
They were not

pleased at all. On the second week I was taken to the Charge Office,
taken by Donald

Card together with four other policemen, White policemen. There was a
fifth one, a

Black man, Chikila. I was interrogated on that day. Taken to another room
in front,

ahead of the interrogation office. They kicked me into the room. I was
assaulted on

that day.

ADV SANDI: The doctor you saw whilst in detention, what was his name?

MR MNGAZA: Before I was taken to the doctor, because this doctor I was
taken to

was from Queenstown Mental Hospital. After I had been beaten up I was
charged at

Fleet Street. They said that I had hit policemen. What is strange, the
Magistrate never

asked why my face was so swollen up. He just committed me to Dubangeni
Mental

Hospital in Queenstown.

ADV SANDI: Had you made a request to the Magistrate that you want to be
sent to

Dubangeni?

MR MNGAZA: No, they just said that the police said that because I was in
solitary

confinement I went insane and I fought the police. Therefore, they said
that I was not

mentally stable, I was deranged, this is why I was supposed to have
fought the

policemen. I was examined by a doctor, I was not examined by a doctor, I
was just

sent to Dubangeni Hospital for 28 days. It is there that I was examined
by a doctor

from the mental hospital.

ADV SANDI: Who was the Magistrate presiding?

MR MNGAZA: I did not know him even then, but I remember at the time, that

should be available at, in the records.

ADV SANDI: I would like to hear more about this Dubangeni business. You
were

sent to this hospital, a hospital for the mentally deranged, because you
fought against

the police? You were discharged from Dubangeni. Did you go to any legal

representative?

MR MNGAZA: Before long Dr Robbinson realised that I had been beaten up by
the

Boers. He said that he would not make me stay there, because I was
clearly not

mentally ill. I had just been beaten by the Boers. They said, he said
that they should

leave a security man, because they are not going to keep somebody who is
not

deranged. He wrote a report that I had been beaten up already, because he
did not see

any, could not detect any mental illness. My attorney, Kannemeyer from

Grahamstown, wrote to the Security Police that I should be taken back to
Stutterheim

Prison for detention to complete my detention period. I was taken into a
cell with a lot

of lice. I spent two nights there. They took me from there back to
Cambridge Police

Station.

ADV SANDI: Did they beat you up again?

MR MNGAZA: No, what happened is they took me again to court and they

withdrew the charges of assault.

ADV SANDI: Did you take any steps claiming, because you had been
ill-treated by

the police?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, after the 90 day detention. On the 19th day I was called
and

released. I laid a charge opening a civil case, having been harassed and
assaulted by

the security. Nothing came of this case, because they were handling it in
any case.

ADV SANDI: In 1964 you made a request for a passport to leave the
country. Are

you, were you talking about an exit permit?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, I applied for a passport. They refused. I, when I wanted
to

find out what the reasons were for the denial they would not disclose
them.

ADV SANDI: Then in 1967 you were arrested for sabotage?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, I was arrested again for sabotage, membership of the PAC,

suppression of communism. There were a lot of charges laid, a long list
it was. I was

taken to the Supreme Court in Grahamstown.

ADV SANDI: You were in detention for three months

MR MNGAZA: Yes, solitary confinement in Grahamstown.

ADV SANDI: When you appeared in court you were sentenced. What happened?

MR MNGAZA: My case lasted a week. It was supposed to have lasted longer as

there were many charges. However, it collapsed after the first week,
because of the

cross-examination made to the chief witnesses. It was evident that lies
were told about

me.

ADV SANDI: Therefore you were innocent?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, I was acquitted.

ADV SANDI: After that, you left in 1967?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, I had to get an exit permit, because I could not get a
passport.

Fortunately when we were in Grahamstown we smuggled documents to the
United

Nations and my name was in the list of South African cases that were on
at the time.

The Senegal Government said to the French Embassy in East London to give
me a

political asylum in Senegal as I was in the list for the oppressed in
South Africa, the

tortured.

ADV SANDI: So you were in Senegal and other countries?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, from there I went to Senegal where my organisation said I
must

open an office. From there I went to Nigeria, to Tanzania. From Tanzania
I went to

Europe. I stayed in London. I covered the whole of Europe, Iceland and

Scandinavian countries working for the organisation.

ADV SANDI: You came back in 1992 without a wife or children?

MR MNGAZA: Yes, I came back alone. I am still alone. It was difficult to
bring

back my family, because I have no place to stay. It is difficult to bring
back a family if

you have no place to stay.

ADV SANDI: You have a request about that?

MR MNGAZA: If the Commission could help me with accommodation so that my

family can come back. They cannot come back. Secondly, I do not know if I
should

proceed.

ADV SANDI: Yes, you may proceed. Have you applied for a special pension?

MR MNGAZA: That is what I was going to talk about. I have applied for a
special

pension last year, but there has been no response. If the Commission
could help me

and urge them along. It is my sister only to help me. I do not have
transport either.

Secondly, that the Commission could help me, I need to exhume my son's
body who

passed away in Botswana working for the organisation. He died in 1992. I
need for

him to be buried at home. Fourthly, I think something should be done for
freedom

fighters in terms of a heroes acre. Our people are all over the African
Continent, some

even in Europe. If they could be exhumed and buried so that people may be
able to

see their late family members who had fought for liberation. I think that
would help

people if the TRC could help as well as it is quite expensive. It is
expensive to exhume

peoples' bodies, but it should be done as a tribute to the fallen heroes.

ADV SANDI: You lost a lot. You lost your business, you lost your family,
your

family is all over the world. I am going to, however, hand you over to
the Chairperson

now. Maybe he has questions for you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you for your story. Mrs Crichton will read a statement

from Mr Card. It is a long statement. I will ask her to hurry. There are
a lot of people

still to come. You may step down. Thank you.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you Mr Chairperson.

		"I the undersigned, Donald John Card, do hereby state

I am retired, 68 years of age and reside at 5 Avon

Road, Woodleigh, East London. On the 22nd of May

1997 I was handed a document from the Truth and

Reconciliation Commission in terms of Act number 34

of 1995 wherein it is stated that a certain Mr Vuyani

Mngaza was going to testify before the Commission

between the ninth and 12 of June 1997 and was going

to implicate me. I do remember Mr Mngaza as the

only garage owner in Duncan Village during the

1960's.

		In 1965 when a man, who was the messenger for the

PAC high command in exile (Lesotho) and the

remaining pockets of PAC members in South Africa

was arrested, it became clear that Mr Mngaza played a

leading role in the activities of the PAC in East

London and, in fact, he was responsible for sending a

woman to Lesotho to assist the PAC. This woman

and Mr Mngaza were involved in the intended attack

and killing of Whites throughout South Africa.

		I am not sure whether I or others under me actually

arrested Mr Mngaza, but he was taken into custody

and later charged. At no time was Mr Mngaza

assaulted by me or anyone else in my presence while

he was in custody, but on what occasion I did hear that

Mr Mngaza had acted strangely and was taken to the

doctor for mental observation.

		Mr Mngaza was later charged and appeared before the

Supreme Court in Grahamstown before Judge

Kannemeyer. Due to the fact that the court felt that

there was insufficient evidence to corroborate the main

State witness, Mr Mngaza was acquitted. At the trial

Mr Mngaza swore under oath that he was not a

member of the PAC and I know notice in Annexure

EC68/96 that he was a founder member of the Border

region of the PAC. That, of course, says very little for

his integrity, but I suppose he will say that he told lies

to stay out of prison. So, is he lying now for the sake

of money.

		With regard to the allegations on Annexure 68/96, I

will deal with them as follows. Number one, I did not

know that there was a Border branch of the PAC in

1950. I believed that it was established after 1957.

Number two, I had no dealings with the arrest of Mr

Mngaza in 1963. In fact, I did not know that he had

been arrested. Number three, I have no knowledge of

Mr Mngaza's detention and release on the 11th of

October 1963. Four, in 1963 I was not a member of

the Security Police nor did I have dealings with Mr

Mngaza then. Five, ...".

I am on point number five of Mr Donald John Card's statement about Mr
Vuyani

Mngaza.

		"In 1963 I did work with Detective- Sergeant

Scheepers, Detective-Constable Chikila, Constable

Babba Gooysen and Detective-Constable Hans

Mynhardt, but we had nothing to do with Mr Mngaza.

Sixth, I do remember that Mr Mngaza was sent for

mental observation, but I cannot remember for how

long. I do remember that he was declared fit for trial

so do not know whether he was pretending or not.

Seven, I have no knowledge of a civil claim. Eight, the

Attorney-General has nothing to do with civil claims

and neither did the Security Police. These claims are

dealt with between the claimants advocate, the

registrar and the court. So I find Mr Mngaza's

statement very difficult to understand. Nine, I have no

knowledge of an application for a passport by Mr

Mngaza. Ten, to the best of my knowledge, Mr

Mngaza had left this country by 1967 and I do not

know about these charges. 11, If my memory serves

me correctly, our money system in 1967 was in rands

and not in pounds. I also do not know of a further

charge of sabotage in 1967 against Mr Mngaza. 12,

Mr Mngaza was arrested in 1964 or 65 on a minor

charge and was released on R500,00 bail, but when he

was re-arrested on a more serious charge, bail was

opposed and he was kept in custody in East London

and transferred to Grahamstown for trial before the

Supreme Court. 13, The trial before Judge

Kannemeyer was in 1965 and not in 1967. 14, I do

not know the cost of legal fees, but do know that

individuals seldom pay for legal fees when a political

organisation is involved. It is again strange that rands

and not pounds are now quoted. 15, The sale of Pan

African Motors took place sometime after Mr Mngaza

was acquitted and it must have cost a considerable

amount of money to go to Dakar with his whole

family. 16, I did see letters written by Mr Mngaza

from Senegal. 17, I know that the whole family left

with him. 18, I did not know that Mr Mngaza had

returned to South Africa.

		I would like to point out that the information supplied

on the Annexure appears to be that of a confused

person and honestly does not make sense to me and

therefore it is very difficult to answer except to say that

Mr Mngaza was not assaulted by me or anyone else in

my presence nor was he badly treated. He did have to

wait some time for his trial, but that was a matter for

the courts and not the police.

		Furthermore, I gain the impression that what Mngaza

is seeking is the R2 650,00 which he says he paid for

legal costs. This appears to be a small amount of

money for an attorney and an advocate's attendance at

a Supreme Court hearing in Grahamstown. Mr

Mngaza's stated under oath that he was not a PAC

member, but it is now obvious that he is once again

lying in order to substantiate his claims for costs.

Signed Donald John Card.".

Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Again, it is very sad that Mr Card is not here personally so
that we

can ask him questions according to his statement. It is also sad that he
is, he made a

judgement about the confusion of Mr Mngaza. In our eyes we see him as a
perfectly

normal person, not a confused person, but we will try and get in touch
with Mr Card.

Maybe in Section 29 hearing so that we can get clarity in what is written
in his

statement. He imputed bad motives to Mr Mngaza.

	We think that we have to close. The report we got concerning electricity
is

that this effected the whole Highway area. It will, this will continue
and they hope that

if the weather is clear tomorrow our proceedings are going to be normal.
If it is not

they are going to request a generator to help us. Tomorrow we have a
women hearing

looking at issues which involved women in detention. We have 14 people,
were

supposed to give their evidence today. We thought that tomorrow the women
hearing

will proceed as planned from half past nine. If we manage to finish in
time we will

continue with this hearing tomorrow, but if we have to go through to
Friday we will

do that and have our hearing up until 12 on Friday. All the people who
are, who were

supposed to testify today, we will meet with them tomorrow, but if we did
not finish

we will meet them on Friday. We have to listen to everybody, because this
is our last

hearing. We would like people to be patient with us. If we knew that
there is this

situation here in Mdantsane we would have brought our own electricity
from Cape

Town. It is said that you do not pay electricity here in Mdantsane. Thank
you and we

will come tomorrow at half past nine.

	------------------------------









	1	V MNGAZA





MDANTSANE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

