	1	S MOCHAWE


	1	S MOCHAWE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: SHADRACK MOCHAWE

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: We call Shadrack Mochawe. Good morning Shadrack.

	Shadrack you have also come from Vryburg and you have come to tell us
what happened to you on the 19th of October 1990 when you were on your
way to work.

	Mr Wynand Malan will be leading you and I hand over to him.

	Can you please stand and take the oath.

SHADRACK MOCHAWE: (sworn states)

MR MALAN: Mr Mochawe you gave us a very focused, a very clear statement
and I would like you in your own words,to share that again orally with us
and with those present here. You have the floor. Please tell us your
story.

MR MOCHAWE: It was on the 19th October 1990. That day I woke up just
fine. I left my place for work. On my way I saw people coming from the
other direction - the opposite direction I was heading for. I was
surprised, the group of people coming from the opposite, I was wondering
what was happening. I thought I should just ask one of those people what
was happening.

	The person told me that the policemen were beating people up on the
other side. As he was relating the story, there the teargas was falling
just in front of us.

I just saw it was wise for me to save myself and go back

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	S MOCHAWE

home in stead of going to work. I did exactly that.

	As I entered home I asked, where are the children? She told me that the
children went to school. I asked her what time did they go to school? She
told me, just now, they just left.

	I left, to go out. They were still not so far away. I told them, don't
go to school. There is just confusion outside. They went back home.

	As I was also going out of the home to see if everything was safe, then
a Hippo came by. Because I was also scared, I thought probably something
could happen to me as well, and I thought of just going back home,
running to the door, opening the door, it was just when I felt the shot.

	I just sat down and some boys ran by to just pull me inside the home. At
night, I don't even know where they got transport to take me to hospital,
but I got to the hospital, and at hospital I just had some difficulties
there. I was lying there and there was not so much help that we got from
the hospital. And the way I was, I was just in pain, sleeping in there.
There was also the AWB there who didn't allow anyone to enter the
building we were in.

	I also consulted the doctor on that very night of the same day. The
doctor didn't give me any treatment. He only ordered me to be smeared
with an ointment on the back and on the head. I only stayed in the
hospital, receiving this treatment with the ointment. Even when I wanted
to go to the toilet the AWB told me, just mess around yourself where you
are staying. Because this is where you are coming to die.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	3	S MOCHAWE

	Luckily it was on a Tuesday morning, the doctor discharged me from the
hospital. I couldn't walk and I was held by the other people, who took me
home. When I arrived at home I found that people were already making
funeral arrangements for me, they thought I was dead.

	By the time I was in the hospital there were white policemen who came to
me, who took a statement from me. What surprised me even up until today
is that I have never been to the court with this case.

	Some of the people who got shot on that very same day, some of whom I
saw at the hospital, were sentenced to jail. Others were sentenced for
about four years and others for about five years. The others are still
here today.

	I am still surprised up until today why haven't been afforded the
opportunity to appear in court after so many years.

	I am no more able to carry on. I'm not able to carry on any more.

MR MALAN: Do you have anything more to say, then you can do it at your
convenience? Mr Mochawe, can I just ask, does that conclude your story or
do you have something more to tell us and if so, you can do that a little
later if you want to take a break.

MR MOCHAWE: Sir, I won't be able to carry on. I still have this pellet in
my body now. I 'm not feeling well here. I'm not able to carry on.

MR MALAN: Do you let this matter stand down and that you leave the stand
for the moment and if you feel better later, we will recall you and if
you would like to continue then we will do so.



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	4	S MOCHAWE

	Thank you very much for the moment. I will not be asking you any
questions now. Thank you for coming to us.

	------------------





