
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	24-07-1996	NAME: THUSO MOERANE

						 BILLY DAGADA

CASE: QUEENSTOWN

DAY 3



THUSO MOERANE:	(sworn states)

BILLY DAGADA:	(sworn states)

REVD FINCA:	Ntsiki Sandi.

MR SANDI:	Mr Moerane, let us now start off by saying your story is about
your son Lenare, who was shot by the police here in Queenstown in 1977.

T MOERANE:	Yes, it is like that.

MR SANDI:	What had happened according to what you know? Why was he shot?

T MOERANE:	I would like to read an extract from this book written by
Holiday about Queenstown just a few lines. The (indistinct) given by
Soweto children has resulted in incidents of arson and violence in
Mlungisi lately. On September 30, young Blacks begin a five day campaign
in protest against Apartheid in which the Mallet Hall and other buildings
in Mlungisi are destroyed or damaged and shops, houses and cars in the
(indistinct) street area, are stoned.

	South African police have to use guns and two youths die.

	So one of those was one of my sons.

MR SANDI:	Let's start now. What was your son doing at the time?

T MOERANE:	I know he was a student. He was a student at Quwanqa Secondary
doing form 2, which is standard 7 today.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			T MOERANE

MR SANDI:	How old was he?

T MOERANE:	He was 16.

MR SANDI:	According to what you heard, because you said you were not
present on that day, people say there was a students' march here in
Queenstown when he was shot?

T MOERANE:	When we gave our statements, during the course of last week, I
met this boy who was there with my son at that time, then I asked him to
come and explain to the Commission. His name is Billy Dagada, sitting
here next to me.

MR SANDI:	So do you want to say you're now handing over to him to explain
what actually happened, because he happened to be present on that day?

T MOERANE:	Yes, it is like that.

MR SANDI:	Over to you Mr Dagada. Let's hear from you.

B DAGADA:	I must thank you for this opportunity, also thank the people of
Queenstown and the Commissioners. In 1977 we were students here in
Queenstown. We joined other students protesting against Afrikaans which
was being forced as a medium of instruction.

	So some of the places like the Mallet Hall were burnt down, some of our
hero's were working with to fight against this Afrikaans, also died.

	On this particular Sunday we were marching from Zwelitswa towards
Johnson. It was at about half past seven, then there were some police
vans. One of them was a certain car that was known to be having some
people that used to beat up.

	Then as students ... (intervention)

MR SANDI:	Excuse me Mr Dagada. Who is Claassen?

B DAGADA:	Claassen was a White man who was working here at

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			B DAGADA

the police station here in Queenstown and he was in the forefront of the
people who used to arrest people.

MR SANDI;	Continue.

B DAGADA:	We stopped this vans, but before they could stop completely,
when we were there next to Johnson, there were shots that we could hear.
These were not only from the police in the van.

	On that day there were some policemen that were hiding in Mzwabandu,
because some of the shots were coming from a house shooting the marchers
and I was one of the marchers.

	That is where comrade Lenare died. I was also shot. We were all taken
into a police van. I was unconscious and we were taken to a mortuary here
in town, only to find that I was still alive, then I was taken to
hospital.

	We were interrogated by policemen and some of them, some of us were
under police guard for 24 hours. At about ten I was taken to the police
station and I was tortured.

	Then Lenare died three days thereafter and he was under police guard.

MR SANDI:	Where did they shoot Lenare?

B DAGADA:	He was shot here on the forehead and the bullet was here at the
back in the brain and then the Doctors were negligent because they did
not transfer him to hospitals in East London because they did not care.

MR SANDI:	As a person who was present at the time, do you perhaps know
the name of any police who shot at Lenare?

B DAGADA:	Those policemen, one of them was Jovane, another one Claassen.
There was another busy one who looked like Mqengwani, who kept on talking
like a dog and he was not actually beating us.

MR SANDI:	Is that all you have to say about the shooting of

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			B DAGADA

Lenare?

B DAGADA:	That is not all. In the hospital it was not good because the
Doctors neglected us because we were activists. The policemen used to
take our pills that we had got from the Doctors and throw them away and
we were subjected to electric shocks, even our testicles were even
subjected to those electric shocks.

MR SANDI:	Did you ever make any complaints, lodge any complaints to the
Doctors and the Superintendent of the Hospital?

B DAGADA:	Claassen would not give us any opportunity to see a Doctor and
we were not expected to make any complaints. In stead what was happening
was torture mainly.

MR SANDI:	Let's now go back to Mr Moerane. Surely Mr Moerane, you have an
aim by being here today. Do you perhaps have any requests to forward to
this Commission and what is it?

T MOERANE:	If we could get hold of the person who shot my son, in the
spirit of reconciliation I would say, he should come forward to ask for
an apology.

MR SANDI:	Is that the only request you have?

T MOERANE:	According to my statement I said that particular person should
justify the shooting, but as we are listening to this evidence, it was
just to scatter the marchers who were not showing to be dangerous at that
time.

MR SANDI;	Is that all you would like to say before this Commission?

T MOERANE:	Yes, I think I'm forced to stop because I lost confidence in
the system of justice because the one sitting here was in house arrest
for five years, and when I asked why from the Minister of Justice, who
was B.J.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			T MOERANE

Vorster, he answered and said, I was considered to be potentially
dangerous, which was not a good answer to me.

	Even prior to that, my father who was a teacher in Bantu High School,
fighting against Bantu education, when some of the teachers were
reinstated to their jobs, my father was forced to take pension.

	Then I said then, there is no justice. Worst of all, they were not going
to bring my son back to life.

MR SANDI:	If that is all, then I'll hand you over to the Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you. Sir, these boys were a group. Now do you think
there could be some commemoration that could be organised for these
children who died which could serve as a warning to the people that
people who are marching peacefully may not be tortured or harassed so
that they should remain vivid in the minds of the people?

T MOERANE:	I did consider that, but I got confused.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Moerane, there are people in our land who carry themselves
with immense dignity - I'll say it in Xhoza now, who make us proud to be
who we are.

	And I want to say that in your testimony today, you have said very
little, but the way in which you have said it, carries so much dignity,
self respect and pride that we are proud of people like yourselves.

	You have related a very short story, but you have related it so well, it
has touched the members of the Commission very profoundly.

	It is a story which ought to have left you with a lot of bitterness, but
it is a story that also surely leaves you and your family with a lot of
pride.

	That out of the Moerane household there was born a

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			

young man who gave his life for others. We salute you, we salute your son.

	It pains us that your wife who has died recently cannot join you on this
day, but we salute her too in her grave.

	What you said in your summary that all that you require is for this
person to say he is sorry, beyond that you have got no other interest.

	It is deeply touching. Thank you very much.

	--------------------

