
	1

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		29.10.96		ALEXANDRA

NAME:		SEKITLA ANNA MOGANO

MS MKHIZE: We greet you, Mam. You have been waiting for a long time since
morning up to this time but we are happy that you have your time. You are
here in front of the Commission, Truth Commission, today. Before I hand
over to the person who will be leading you in your evidence I would like
you to stand up to take an oath.

SEKITLA ANNA MOGANO (s.s.)

MR LEWIN: Mam Mogano we would like to welcome you and thank you for
staying on to come and tell us your stories which in fact is a story in
two parts about your two sons, one from 1985, one from 1990. If you could
just tell us about what happened to them starting with Silas in 1985 and
then your second son in 1990. Please feel that you can speak in your own
time and in your own words. Thank you.

MR MOGANO: My son Silas on the 7th March 1985, it was on a Sunday, he
said he was going out. Since he left at that time he never came back
again. On the Monday we started enquiring about him. I told people to go
and look for him at his friends but he was not there. Even the friends
were asking where Silas was. That happened until the whole week. We were
surprised that how can he disappear for the whole week. We went to the
police station. We produced his photo, we told the police that he
disappeared and we were looking for some help. They said we must go to
the mortuary of number 4 because there are people who have been killed.

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	MOGANO

We went to that mortuary but he was not there. We went to John Vorster
Square but he was not there. We came back home. We were so confused
because we didn't even have a clue but we left his photo at the police
station. We were confused. After five years, on the 7th March 1990
Matepe, one of my children, he was killed by the white men. We were in
the house, it was during the night, it was on a Friday. He left, he said
he was going to school, he was going to study there. He was a student in
one of the schools in town. He was in Braamfontein, he was doing standard
10. When he left it was round about half past 8. After a few minutes we
heard gun fire three times. His brother Lucas went out to see what was
happening. He said here is Matebe, he is shot. We went out, my Matebe
fell down. We saw a van, a white man's van driving away. We asked him
what was happening, he said those people shot me. We took Matebe to the
house, we were still wondering what to do. He was still talking. His
brother went out and got a car. He asked for some help and he told the
man that Matebe is shot by the boers. They took Matebe to the clinic with
the car. When they arrived at the clinic Matebe died on arrival. They
came back, they told me that when we arrived at the clinic Matebe was
certified dead. I lost strength, my brother Molepo and Lucas they made
funeral arrangements. I was very sick and weak, I couldn't go to the
mortuary, I couldn't do anything because I was very weak at the time. On
a Saturday morning we got the canisters, they took them to the police
station, they were in my gate, they were right at the gate at home. The
police asked if we knew the people, we said no we don't know them. We
just saw this car that was driving away, we don't even know who were the
people. There was no case

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	MOGANO

because we didn't know whom to accuse. We made arrangements for the
funeral. The most painful thing he left a girl who was three months
pregnant. This girl brought the child to me, I was working for the
Council and I used to take this child with me and I had to take the child
to the cr…che, pre-school and now I am not working, I don't know how am I
going to support this child. This is the most painful thing in my life.
What is he going to eat because I am not working now. I don't have money.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much, Mama. If I could ask a few questions just
to make the story clearer for us and start with Matepe and the child. How
old is the child now?

MR MOGANO: On the 18th September he will be seven years old.

MR LEWIN: And the mother, are you looking after her as well?

MR MOGANO: I don't even know his mother. When I went to check her at her
home they said she left with other gentlemen.

MR LEWIN: Then if I could go back to the disappearance of Silas in 1985.
Could you tell us a little bit more about him, how old was he.

MR MOGANO: He was born in 1957. He was working. He was born in 1957. He
had disappeared in 1985. He was working. MR LEWIN: You described him in
your statement as having been a 1976 comrade. In 1976.

MR MOGANO: Yes, that is correct.

MR LEWIN: And a member of the UDF?

MR MOGANO: I am not sure about that.

MR LEWIN: Was he active politically?

MR MOGANO: I only know that he was a comrade.

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	MOGANO

MR LEWIN: And do you have - have you ever heard anything more about him
or have you any idea what happened to him?

MR MOGANO: No, I know nothing. I heard nothing about him. MR LEWIN: When
you went to John Vorster Square, you say in your statement they told you
to go to Mandela to find out about him.

MR MOGANO: Yes, that is correct.

MR LEWIN: ... with Shell House, whether his name is there amongst missing
people?

MR MOGANO: I have been to all the places but I couldn't find him.

MR LEWIN: And then going on now to Matepe and 1990. You say it was a
yellow car or was it a yellow police van that you saw driving off?

MR MOGANO: Yes, that is correct.

MR LEWIN: So it was a police van was it, or a car?

MR MOGANO: All I know it was the white man that used to visit my home.

MR LEWIN: And were these policemen?

MR MOGANO: Yes, it was white policemen.

MR LEWIN: And when you spoke to your son after he had been shot he said
those men shot me. Is that right? So he saw who shot him.

MR MOGANO: Yes, he told me so.

MR LEWIN: Was he involved politically as well?

MR MOGANO: Yes, he was the leader of the comrades.

MR LEWIN: ... the police said that he was misleading the youth and that
he had guns. Did you ever see him with guns?

MR MOGANO: No.

MR LEWIN: ... they wanted to attack him.

MR MOGANO: They used to come home looking for him, they

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	MOGANO

said he is teaching other children to write on the walls. I asked if they
had seen him doing that, they said yes some people told them. I told them
to bring that person to me. They said they won't do that. I told them
that they must that person who told them that, they must bring that
person to me, he must explain to me when he saw him writing on the walls.

MR LEWIN: And after he died you say nothing was done. Was there a post
mortem? Was there a case? No case?

MR MOGANO: We were unable to open the case because we didn't know those
people. Because even after his death they came to me and asked for him
and I asked why were they asking me that question because they told me
that they were going to kill him but I was unable to open the case
against anybody because I didn't know the people.

MR LEWIN: And could you identify them now? Would you know who they were?

MR MOGANO: I don't know them. I don't know those people.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much, Mama. I will pass you back to the
Chairperson.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you, Mam. We are going to make a follow up. Did Silas
have any friends before his disappearance?

MR MOGANO: He used to have some friends on 14th Avenue but on that day of
his disappearance we went to his friends and we enquired there but all
they said is that they don't know anything. I don't know today where are
those friends.

MS MKHIZE: Did they try to help you maybe by giving you some clues?

MR MOGANO: When I went to 12th Avenue they referred me to 14th Avenue and
I went there. I was told that he was not there. Even the friends who were
staying on 12th Avenue.

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	MOGANO

They told me the same thing that they didn't see him on that particular
day.

MS MKHIZE: Was he a student or was he working at the time?

MR MOGANO: He was working.

MS MKHIZE: What about his friends that he was working with?

MR MOGANO: It is old man, old married man. We didn't go to them and they
didn't see him on that day.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you Mam. Thank you for coming. One of the things that
the Truth Commission is charged with is to assist families with
information which will clarify for them as to what happened to people who
disappeared and we are hoping that our investigative unit will assist us
to be able to confirm whether people died so that families can be able to
perform whatever rituals which are important for them in honour of their
beloved ones. In our case it is sad to hear that you lost both your sons
during the difficult years in the history of our country. We will be in
touch with you with whatever information which we have got. We have noted
the name of the child, although we didn't get the name of the child,
Matsepe's child, we have noted that there is a child whom you are looking
after who needs assistance with education. We thank you very much for
coming.

	---------------------

