	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 05-02-1997		NAME: TINY MATLAKALA MOKGOSHI

HELD A:	BENONI

DAY 1

----------------------------------------------------------

MR LEWIN: I would like now to call the next witness, Tiny Matlakala. And
ask her please to come forward.

I must apologise, I think we have changed names around. Your surname is
Mokgoshi, is it?

MS MOKGOSHI: Yes.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much. Before I ask Dr Ally to lead you in
evidence, could I please ask you to stand and take the oath?

MS MOKGOSHI: (sworn states)

DR ALLY: Welcome to you Mrs Mokgoshi and to those who are accompanying
you. Do you want to introduce them to us?

MS MOKGOSHI: This is my mother and my sister.

DR ALLY: Welcome to you too.

	You are coming to speak about what happened to your husband, Alfred.
Will you please go through your statement for us? Thank you.

MS MOKGOSHI: In 1986 on the 1st of May my husband on that day went to the
stadium. He said that there is a meeting at the stadium.

	When he arrived there then they said there were no meeting and the
police chased them out of the stadium. Then they returned home.

	Whilst he was on the way home, passing through the streets coming home,
then there was an arrest at a certain



park. When I asked him, then he said they have killed a policeman there.
It was during the day around two o'clock.

	Whilst he was still there the police were patrolling the streets. We
were confined to our yards. Around eight to half past eight the police
came. They knocked at the windows and at the doors and it was dark. We
lit candles.

	Then there were a black policeman and an Indian and a white policeman.
Then they entered the house with a certain lady called, Matsiso. Then he
asked the police what are you looking for, then they said they are
looking for this man. Then my uncle said, what are you looking for and
the police pushes my uncle. Then they said they were looking for Alfred.

	They found him. He was asleep by then. When he woke up I wanted to give
him a trouser, but they denied. Then they took him with his underwear.
Then they hit him with their rifle butts. They took him to the Hippo.

They took him to the charge office at Actonville.

	The following day I found him there, bringing food and clothes and
asking for Alfred. Then they said you are not going to see him, because
we are still busy with him. Then I asked them what are you doing.

	The office was crowded by people. Then they asked me, are you the wife
of the sell-out? I was pregnant at the time, the pregnancy was eight
months.

	Then they said I should give it to somebody who would give him the
clothes and food.

	They took him to Bedford Police Station. When I arrived there they took
him first to court in Benoni, then

they were remanded.

	Then I asked him, why are you injured? Then he told me that he was
assaulted whilst he was in the cells. Then he said that I should tell
them the truth that I have burnt a policeman. After that he was taken to
Bedford Police Station.

	On the Saturday morning I went there. Then I told my sister to accompany
me. We arrived at that police station at six o'clock in the morning. Then
I asked them to see my Alfred.

	When he appeared he was swollen all over the body. He bled through his
ears. Then he said, go and call the doctor.

	Then I went to call Dr Bouwer. When I arrived at Dr Bouwer's surgery I
told him that my husband is dying. He is bleeding through his ears. He is
not able to talk. He is swollen. Then I pleaded with Dr Bouwer to leave
the other patients to come and see my husband.

	Then the doctor told me to board a taxi. Then he will follow me.

	When the doctor arrived at the cells he asked them some questions. Then
the police said to Dr Bouwer, leave we will take him to the hospital. The
police said they will use the ambulance to take him to hospital.

	Whilst he was in the hospital I went there. Lying on the bed, he was
fastened on the sides of the bed. Then he was not able to shake himself.
He was recovering there. 	Then after that he went to court. Then he was
given a free ..... They were represented by the state lawyers. We went
for his case five or six times. Then from there he was transferred to the
disciplinary court in Pretoria. 	Then he was remanded again, twice again,
on the fourth time then they said this is the final day for disposing the
case.

	Then he entered the witness box. The Advocate came to me and said, you
must not worry, your husband is going to be sentenced for four years.
Then I asked him, why is that, because he does not know anything. At
Bedford Police Station he did confess that he did participate in the
matter.

	While we were still in the discipline court in Pretoria we were told
that it is going to be the last time to hear the case.

	The Magistrate said to him, you will be sentenced to four years. The
other two years will be suspended and he will do hard labour in jail. And
the fine was R2 000.

	And he pleaded with the Magistrate to let him go and the Magistrate
said, alright you pay R110 every month and my husband could not pay that
money because he was now epileptic. He could not do anything.

	He went to see the Advocate in Johannesburg. He told them that he will
not be in a position to pay the fine monthly, because he was not working.
Until to this day nothing happened.

	He passed away in 1995. It was in October.

DR ALLY: Thank you for that. If you do not mind just a few questions.

	The previous witness who was up here, who spoke about Boy Lucas Zwane,
was this somebody known to you, to your husband, because in your ....

MS MOKGOSHI: I do not know. This man was pointing out at every house,
thinking that the police would let him go.

DR ALLY: No, I am sorry. I think you misunderstood me.

	Zwane, the previous witness came to speak about an uncle who was also
involved in this strike and was also beaten up and dragged by a Hippo.
Was this somebody who your husband knew? Do you know the family? The
Zwane family who was just here before you?

MS MOKGOSHI: I know that family because my husband and the Bisaro family
were together in discipline court.

DR ALLY: And your husband and Mr Zwane, did they know each other? Were
they friends?

MS MOKGOSHI: No, they were not friends.

DR ALLY: Now you say that somebody actually came to your house with the
police to come and point out your husband. Do you have any idea why they
would have been coming around to your husband's house? Was your husband
active in any political organisation or in any trade union?

MS MOKGOSHI: He was not an active member. He was just an ordinary person.

DR ALLY: And you also said, if I heard you correctly that your husband
did say that he was either present or participated in the killing of this
policeman? Am I correct? Did you actually say that your husband made that
statement?

MS MOKGOSHI: He said he was passing and as he was passing by he saw a
person burning.

DR ALLY: Is that the statement that your husband made? That he actually
only witnessed it. He just happened to be passing by when this was taking
place?

MS MOKGOSHI: Yes, that is correct. He was just passing by.

DR ALLY: And this sentence that your husband got. You

said he was charged and he was sentenced to two years in jail and fined
R2 000.

MS MOKGOSHI: The R2 000 was a fine.

DR ALLY: A fine yes. Did he serve any time in jail? Did he actually go to
jail?

MS MOKGOSHI: No, he promised that he will pay the charge monthly.

DR ALLY: And after this, your husband never ever worked again. After he
was released from jail.

MS MOKGOSHI: He could not work any more. He was getting pension.

DR ALLY: And also disability, you said he was given a disability grant.

MS MOKGOSHI: No, he never received any disability grant.

DR ALLY: And after that case in the Supreme Court, that was the last had
any dealings with the police and the family had any dealings with the
police.

MS MOKGOSHI: Yes that was the last time they troubled my husband.

DR ALLY: And you as a family did you do anything after this incident? Did
your husband ever take up the way in which he had been beaten up and the
electric shocks and things which were done to him? Did he ever do
anything about it? Did he try to do anything about it? Did he charge the
police?

MS MOKGOSHI: He wanted to lay a charge but he could not, because he died
before he could do that.

DR ALLY: And the family, you yourself. Did you do any thing on this
matter?

MS MOKGOSHI: I have never taken any initiative Sir.

DR ALLY: Could you tell us how you hope the Commission

can be of assistance to you and your family. What is it you would like
the Commission to actually do on this matter?

MS MOKGOSHI: I have three kids and we are staying in a one-roomed shack.

DR ALLY: So it is about you and your family and your children that you
are hoping that...

MS MOKGOSHI: That is correct.

DR ALLY: Thank you very much.

MR MANTHATA: How many are you in the family?

MS MOKGOSHI: It is my mother-in-law, the three children and myself.

MR MANTHATA: What is your mother-in-law doing?

MS MOKGOSHI: She is a pensioner.

MR MANTHATA: Are the children at school?

MS MOKGOSHI: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: Do you remember the name of the State Attorney who took over
the case?

MS MOKGOSHI: I do not remember any more, because I was so disturbed and
this affected me really.

MR MANTHATA: If you had any intention to pursue this matter, it would be
of assistance to know which person to contact. Don't you have any
document that will trace the name of the lawyer?

MS MOKGOSHI: I am sorry I cannot remember anything.

MR MANTHATA: Were you satisfied with the treatment that the doctor gave
your husband?

MS MOKGOSHI: Yes. I was happy, I was satisfied, because my husband was Dr
Bouwer's patient. He was undergoing treatment at Dr Bouwer and he himself
went to examine him at the hospital, after he was assaulted by the police.

MR MANTHATA: Don't you think Dr Bouwer will be of assistance to help you
trace the lawyer?

MS MOKGOSHI: No, I have never been to Dr Bouwer.

MR MANTHATA: What killed your husband?

MS MOKGOSHI: I think a heart attack killed my husband. He was epileptic
and he was mentally disturbed. He would say something to you and a few
minutes thereafter he has forgotten. He could not even walk. Dr Bouwer
said he died of a heart attack.

MR MANTHATA: I thank you.

MS SEROKE: Mrs Mokgoshi I want to know, at the time of the hearing at the
Supreme Court was he found guilty of murder? What was the verdict?

MS MOKGOSHI: I do not know whether he was guilty or not. What he said to
us was he agreed to what was being put on him, because he was assaulted
by the police.

MS SEROKE: Do you know the person who pointed him? Will you be in a
position to identify him?

MS MOKGOSHI: That person is in Wattville, but I have not seen him
recently, because I left the area. I went back home to Daveyton.

MS SEROKE: Will you try and trace that person so that we can take a
statement from him, because he will also give us information as to what
was happening on that day. You were not present, but this person who
pointed your husband must have seen something.

	Please try to tell us where he stays so that we can trace him and get a
statement from him.

MS MOKGOSHI: I will trace him and I will tell you where he stays.

MS SEROKE: Thank you.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mokgoshi, I just want some clarification first. On the
day that the police came to your husband, to your house, you say there
was a lady with them by the name of Matsiso. Is that what you said?

MS MOKGOSHI: That is correct.

DR RANDERA: Now did that lady come to the house to point your husband out?

MS MOKGOSHI: Yes this is Matsiso, who pointed at my husband.

DR RANDERA: And is she still living in the same area as you are?

MS MOKGOSHI: I do not know. I will go and find out. I do not know if she
is still in Wattville or not.

DR RANDERA: OK. I just want to know a little about... It seems that your
husband and Mr Zwane whose family spoke before you, were arrested and
then tortured, because of the killing and necklacing of this policeman.
Do you know the name of the policeman?

MS MOKGOSHI: I do not know the name of the policeman. We were at home. We
only heard that a policeman had been killed.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much.

MR LEWIN: Mrs Mokgoshi I would just like to thank you for coming and for
telling us this story. Again it tells us some of the dreadful things that
did happen in the past. It also explains the context of those of us who
were caught up in the cross fire, what has happened to your husband, a
sort of an innocent victim caught in the cross fire.

	And the helplessness which you as a family have towards what happened to
him and the difficult

circumstances that you have now as a family in bringing up your children
and surviving without him.

	And we do what we can to follow this up, to bring some light on the
matter. But we are very grateful to you for having come forward like this
to tell us.

	Thank you very much.

MS MOKGOSHI: I also thank you.

MR LEWIN: Ladies and gentlemen we will continue with the testimony before
we break for lunch and I would like to ask Alegria Nyoka if she could
please come forward to the witness table.

	Before I call the next witness I would just like to announce that we do
have Statement Takers who are with us. If there are people in the
audience who would like themselves to make statements could they please
contact them. It is Marge and Josephine. They are somewhere around at the
back, but if people could identify themselves if they wish to make
statements and it is possible to have those statements taken. Thank you.

	I would like now please to call the next witness, Sikhumbuze Zwane. Will
you please come forward.



	---------------------------------

















