	1	M M MOKHONWANA


	1	M M MOKHONWANA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.08.1996	NAME:	MASEKU MARY MOKHONWANA

CASE:	JB00170	-	PRETORIA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: ... Mokhonwana. Will you please come forward.

CHAIRPERSON: Who is doing this?

DR BORAINE: Tom. Good morning Mrs Mokhonwana. Can you hear me alright?

MRS MOKHONWANA: Yes Sir.

DR BORAINE: Good. That is excellent. Mrs Mokhonwana, you have come to
tell the story of your son, Obed, and we have been listening since early
this morning about the KwaNdebele massacre, as it has become known, when
at least nine people were killed and one of them was your son and you
carry that heavy burden like so many others before you and will come
after you. Before you tell your story would you please stand to take the
oath.

MASEKU MARY MOKHONWANA: (Duly sworn in, states).

DR BORAINE: Thank you. Will you please be seated. Mrs Mokhonwana, just
before I pass on the proceedings to my colleague, Tom Manthata, could I
just ask you who is with you today, who is sitting next to you?

MRS MOKHONWANA: It is my cousin seated with me.

DR BORAINE: I think it is very important. The reason why we ask this is
not that we are just inquisitive. First we want to welcome people who
come, but it is very, very important to recognise that members of the
family care enough to be with those who have come to give their story.
PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	M M MOKHONWANA

It is not easy. It makes one feel quite nervous sometimes to sit in front
of the bright lights and all the people. Please relax and we are so glad
you have got somebody with you and Mr Manthata is going to assist you to
tell your story. Thank you.

MR MANTHATA: We welcome you together with your cousin. As the
Commissioner has said that this is something that it is so hurting to
you. Please do not be emotional, be relaxed and, in brief, tell us what
you experienced together with the disappearance of Obed.

MRS MOKHONWANA: When Obed disappeared I was at work at that time. I was
phoned and the message was that my son was dead. My son was in B1 at
Nkambule's place. I left work, I went to B1. It was true that the
children left for KwaNdebele. We arrived at B1 and I slept that night.
Then a combi arrived, we left for KwaNdebele where these children died.
When we arrived in KwaNdebele where the children died we were told the
children are at the Government Mortuary in Bronkhorstspruit. When we
arrived at Johannah's place we could not find them. They had already
cleaned the place. We arrived at the mortuary, we could find them there.
What we found there were only bones and ashes.

MR MANTHATA: Are you through Mrs Mokhonwana?

MRS MOKHONWANA: I want to know what happened to my children because they
could be living by now. After a moment Johannah's mother came to B1 and
said this doctor or traditional doctor who can resurrect these children.
Then we must come up with R1 000,00. I said, no, I do not have money to
waste, I know where my child was taken. They said, what he is really
trying to do saying that they will resurrect my son. There is no person
who can be resurrected PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	M M MOKHONWANA

here. They left in the combi and then I said I would not go to that
traditional doctor who they claim will resurrect our children. They went
to that place, but they never brought back the children. They claim that
the children will be resurrected. That never happened.

MR MANTHATA: Mrs Mokhonwana, have you finished telling your story? Mrs
Mokhonwana, did these children ever visit your home in a group? What I am
asking is Obed's friends, were they, use to come into your house?

MRS MOKHONWANA: I use to be at work, but he stayed, Obed stayed at my
sister's place in B1.

MR MANTHATA: When you arrived in KwaNdebele did you see some of the
children's parents who were there at Johannah's place?

MRS MOKHONWANA: We were in a combi when we arrived there. I could not
tell who was there.

MR MANTHATA: When you could not get an answer from Mama Johannah did you
not try to go to the police to ask or even go to the Chief to ask about
the incident?

MRS MOKHONWANA: We did not go, but afterwards, maybe it was after two
weeks, I went to the police station in KwaNdebele. I wanted to know what
happened to the children that night at Johannah's place. When I arrived
the policemen said the accused is not here. When I went there the second
time they said now the person who is handling the case is not here. I was
at the police station in KwaNdebele.

MR MANTHATA: What about the Chief's place? Did you visit the Chief's
place? I cannot hear you Mrs Mary Mokhonwana.

MRS MOKHONWANA: I say I was from the police camp in KwaNdebele after
these children have been buried. I wanted to know about children who died
at number two at Skhosana's

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	M M MOKHONWANA

district, but they told me the person who is handling the case is not
available. I waited for a moment. I went timeously to this police camp,
but they told me that the policeman who is handling the case is not
available. That is when I left everything, but I did go to KwaNdebele.

MR MANTHATA: I thank you Mam Mokhonwana.

CHAIRPERSON: Russell Ally.

DR ALLY: Mama, we have heard from other witnesses that earlier in this
year, 1996, that the police have started investigating this case again.
Have you been approached? Did any police come to you and ask you to make
any statements? I will repeat the question. Can you hear me now? Is the
translation coming through? I will try again. Can you hear the
translation now? And now, is it coming through? Mama can you hear me now?
Some of the witnesses earlier this morning have said that the police,
this year, have come and asked them to make statements about this case,
that they are now looking into this case ten years afterwards. Have you
been approached to make any statements? Did the police come to you?

MRS MOKHONWANA: I do not know, but maybe they must have approached my
sister. They did not come to me. I do not know. They never approached my
place, but they went to my sister's place. They never asked me any
questions.

DR ALLY: But they have asked your sister in this year still?

MRS MOKHONWANA: The police.

DR ALLY: Yes, the police. Have they asked your sister to make a statement
about ...

MRS MOKHONWANA: They never arrived to me, but they arrived when Johannah
brought the two plastics that I found at her

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	M M MOKHONWANA

place. Then they went to the police in Mamelodi. There was a Hippo
around, but I do not know what happened to those things.

DR ALLY: Mama, that was in 1986 after this happened. What I am asking is
now recently, in 1996, the police have gone to some of the other families
who lost children in this event. Did the police come to you?

MRS MOKHONWANA: I do not know because I stay at work. I do not know if
the police did arrive at my place.

DR ALLY: And just one last question. In your statement you say that when
you went into the room in which these youths were killed, you said it
seems a powder of a certain chemical of which I do not know, was used.
The room showed no signs of fire. Now, this, did somebody tell you this
or can you just tell us a little bit about that.

MRS MOKHONWANA: Where these children died we stepped on some ashes, maybe
because of mattress that burnt, but we tiptoed through the house. It was
in the boys room where we found this ashes on the floor.

DR ALLY: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you again Mrs Mokhonwana. I would repeat myself. We
lack words of comfort and sympathy. We know you experienced a tough time
for this period, but we would like you to know that we are prepared to
comfort you and thank you for having come forward to tell your tale.

	------------------------------











PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

