
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 28.11.96		NAME: NANA MOLALOSE

CASE: TEMBISA - DAY 3

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: I'd like to call the person who will be our last witness
today, Nana Molalose. Can we have quiet in the Hall please! Mrs Molalose,
can you hear me through the headphones?

MRS MOLALOSE: Yes.

NANA MOLALOSE:	 (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, and again I would ask Hlengiwe Mkhize to lead
your evidence.

MS MKHIZE: Mrs Molalose, welcome here this afternoon. Regardless of the
fact that you are the last one, your statement is as important and we
will give you enough time. Can you tell the Commission about yourself.
Your statement talks about things that happened in Natal. Wen did you
arrive here and where are you staying?

MRS MOLALOSE: I'm staying in River Park Section 2.

MS MKHIZE: Is it your own place.

MRS MOLALOSE: It's my own house.

MS MKHIZE: Can you tell us about your matter that we can see is one of
those painful events of people who lost in the time of the struggle?

MRS MOLALOSE: I was staying here but the children were still down in
Newcastle in a new location called Number 7. My son was a councillor
there. He is the one who established this place. He was not so powerful
and he did seek help in this regard. After some time, I think there was a
misunderstanding because you can never blame anybody TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	MOLALOSE

and he was being blamed because of him being a councillor. When he wanted
to resign, the community refused. When time went on I got a telephone
message saying that the house was burned down and my son Bongane was
inside. But fortunately he didn't die but he burned his shoulder way down
to his back. I found (end of side A)...

.......these people were actually looking for me. I said to

him, "Why don't you run away?" He said, "I'll be back".

	In those days, while I was expecting him to come back, I heard that he
had passed away. These people came and they took me out of the house
because had a spaza shop, they killed him, they chopped him and hacked
him, they had slit his throat. You couldn't identify him clearly from the
face. they didn't damage his body much, it was his face and they had slit
his throat.

	The things that I had in the house, I removed them, the sofas and the
television and the wardrobes and stove and fridges and even his
furniture, we removed them and we took them to a store. When I realised
the damage I decided that I could never stay here and I tried to seek
some help because there were some girls that I left at home and I sought
help that they should give them some clothing but nobody helped me. And
these girls were studying with the assistance of their brother, but
because of this and because it was restless there they had to come and
stay with me. 	Whilst I was at home I was being harassed, I had to leave
everything as it was, running for my life with the children. I would come
back in the morning because they used to come at night and harass us. I
used to run away and come back in the morning.

	Fortunately we went to another village and buried him TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	MOLALOSE

there. We could not bury him here.

MS MKHIZE: We do understand your pain, the fact that you were harassed
even when you were grieving. These people who came to tell you in the
morning. Hoe did they explain to you?

MRS MOLALOSE: They said to me, he was killed by the community. I said,
"But how can this community kill him

because when my son decided to resign, they refused." But the thing is,
in the township, it's the youth that normally agree and bring disputes.
And then that's where the disagreement came from. When he wanted to
resign because of these youths' resistance the elderly didn't agree and
therefore the youth decided to do what they did.

MS MKHIZE: You said the time he was in the community, was he a member of
any political party?

MRS MOLALOSE: No I'm not aware of that. All I know is that he was a
councillor. He became a councillor because he was a building constructor,
he was building houses for people and he used to intervene and even the
police used to rely on his help. People used to bring identity documents
and take them to the offices to show them how many people need
accommodation. He used to help people with accommodation. As far as
political affiliation, I cannot tell you. All I know is that he helped
the community with accommodation, houses.

MS MKHIZE: I'm asking you this question because in those years people who
were in any political organisation, should they die, they would be buried
by those people who belonged to their party. Were any people from any
political party at the funeral?

MRS MOLALOSE: No they never did. Even the councillors that TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	MOLALOSE

were working with him, there were four in number and the other one was
shot in his leg, and they said we are also scared for our lives. Truly
councillors were killed, Baker was killed and another councillor that I
don't remember, it was another one that was killed first and Baker was
killed when he wanted to see his child which was burned inside the house.
He was shot whilst visiting his children in hospital

and thereafter three councillors were killed after Baker.

MS MKHIZE: Maybe this shows that it is possible that he was killed when
the community had a dispute against their councillors and they were
resisting the former government.

MRS MOLALOSE: I think it is so.

MS MKHIZE: Can you tell us about your other child, about his death.

MRS MOLALOSE: Are you talking about the one who was burned inside the
house?

MS MKHIZE: The on we're talking about is Makethlane. What happened to
Bongane?

MRS MOLALOSE: Bongane, the house was burned while he was inside it. That
is the one I said managed to escape in flames. And the hacked him but he
did not die. He was here on Sunday.

MS MKHIZE: Did he give a statement that he was tortured. Yes he is still
alive but he's just surviving. You can just hear him crying.

MS MKHIZE: The house that you had in this place, did you finally sell it
or what happened to it?

MRS MOLALOSE: The other house was his store and then there was this house
that was in my name but they also burned that house as well.

MS MKHIZE: This place where your house is, which political TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	MOLALOSE

party is predominant, because in Natal areas are divided according to
political parties.

MRS MOLALOSE: I would say in Newcastle the predominant party was the ANC.

MS MKHIZE: We thank you very much. You say where did you bury Mathelane?

MRS MOLALOSE: We buried him at Mondhlo.

MS MKHIZE: You removed him from Newcastle and you buried him at Mondhlo?

MRS MOLALOSE: Yes because it was very difficult here.

MS MKHIZE: You had another house in Mondhlo?

MRS MOLALOSE: Yes.

MS MKHIZE: We thank you very much, I'll take you back to the chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Hlengiwe. Joyce Seroke?

MS SEROKE: Mrs Molalose, I see that you are carrying some photos, is
there anything that you'd like to show us? Is this a house that was
burned down?

MRS MOLALOSE: Yes.

MS SEROKE: Is this area called Seven? Was it a shack town?

MRS MOLALOSE: Yes.

MS SEROKE: Proper houses were not built yet?

MS SEROKE: Yes.

MS SEROKE: Mathelani, was he chosen or elected by the residents of Seven?

MRS MOLALOSE: Yes. He established this place because he was collecting
the identity documents to show the people in the municipality that there
are so many people who are homeless. That is when this place was
established.

MS SEROKE: As you're here, how is the situation in that area called
Number Seven?

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	MOLALOSE

MRS MOLALOSE: In the manner in which I was just disturbed, I just go and
pay the rent for these erfs that I still have but I still haven't sold
them, I'm suffering from cardiac problems. I'm very fragile.

MS SEROKE: Where is Bonganise, is he here at Seven. No he's here with me.

MS SEROKE: Are all your children here. Yes. It's only the house back
there.

CHAIRPERSON: It's very difficult to find words to comfort you. I won't
try and do that, I think the strength of your testimony is that you have,
by taking us out of where we are now, and seeing the pain and the
problems that other people have in different areas, which are sometimes
the same as ours, sometimes different, but which all involve us through
family, through friends, that is very important, that we don't only
concentrate on our own places but think of other places as well. I think
if we see the problems that are there, we also see what we all need still
to do to make things better in our country and where we still need to go
to solve the problems. That is one of the things which the Truth
Commission is trying to do through unravelling the events of the past,
particularly such terrible events as have involved both your sons.

	We would like to thank you very much for coming forward to share that
story with us, we wish you well, we wish your family well and we hope
that we will be able to uncover some of the truth about happened. Thank
you very much for coming.

Joyce Seroke has raised the point that it would be very useful for us if
we could get a statement from Bongane who was at the event as well. If
you could ask him please to contact the Truth and Reconciliation office
in Durban to TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	MOLALOSE

make a statement about what happened, or contact us again so that we
could take a statement. Thank you very much for coming.

MRS MOLALOSE: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Ladies and gentlemen I would like to, in closing this
session in Tembisa, there are one or two

things that I would like to say before we all close and before we say
thank you to all people that have made this whole session possible.

	I think firstly I'd like to repeat what we had to say this morning
because there has been evidence of threats against witnesses coming
forward. There has been evidence of attempted intimidation both of
potential witnesses, but also indirectly of the Commission itself. And I
would like to reiterate that we will not be intimidated, we have been
given a task to do, we are determined to carry out that task and we will
do it on the basis of the brief that has been given to us, that we are an
independent Commission, that at the same time nobody in this country is
above the law. We will investigate where we need, whom we need to
investigate and we will do so with all the powers that are given to us,
and we will not be diverted from doing that by any individuals, any
groups, any organisations, any political parties, anybody. We are here to
do a job, we are determined to do it and we will do it, because we are
doing it in the name of the people. We are doing it for you, for us, for
us the people. This is the peoples' Commission and we are determined to
keep it as such, and we will not be diverted at all from doing what we
need to do.

	The second point which is related to that is that within a very short
time, the date today is the 28th of

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	

November, by the 14th of December the deadline closes for all those
people who feel that they should apply for amnesty. An important part of
the Commission is that people who have themselves committed gross human
rights violations against other people, and let's face it, we have heard
over the last three days a large number of cases, a terrible

number of cases of gross human rights violations against people. Now the
perpetrators, and some of them have been named, or the alleged
perpetrators have been named in these proceedings, those people have a
very simple choice, either they come forward before the 14th of December
to make their amnesty application or they face being liable to
prosecution thereafter. If in the course of our investigations, if in the
course of hearing, as we have heard so movingly and so stirringly over
the last three days. If we are given evidence of people who have carried
out these gross human rights violations against other people, if we
discover them, if we investigate them and they have not made application
for amnesty, then it is our responsibility to hand those cases over to
the Law Department for prosecution and we will not hesitate to do that.
So this is both if you like, a threat and an appeal, that those people
who feel that they have themselves committed acts of gross human rights
violations against other people, and lets face it again, we have heard
their names and we have heard, if not their names, we have heard what has
happened. They have until the 14th of December to come forward and when
their application or if their application goes through and is heard, they
have again the possibility on the one hand of having complete immunity
against criminal and civil prosecution or if they do not follow the
conditions of the application, and they're TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	9	

fairly straight forward, then they will be open to the normal course of
the law.

	And we would appeal to people please to come forward and meet that
deadline for amnesty.

	The third point to make is quite simply that this is not the end of the
process. This is certainly not the end

of the process regards the human rights violations and statements from
people, particularly statements from people in this area, in the Tembisa
area.



	-------------------------------------











