	1 	T MOLALE


	1 	T MOLALE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: THABISO MOLALE

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Thasibo welcomed. Can you tell us who is sitting next to you?

MR MOLALE: It is my mother.

DR RANDERA: Welcome to your mother too.

THABISO MOLALE: (sworn states)

MR MANTHATA: Thabiso, can you please tell us what happened to in 1985.

MR MOLALE: Yes, I can say.

MR MANTHATA: You can continue.

MR MOLALE: It was in 1985 on the 14th of July. I made a mistake when I
said it was on the 2nd of July. It was the 14th of July.

	It was when my mother sent me to the shop, it is a shop in Mariri Street
and when I went to the shop I met a group of the youth singing a song at
the corner. It was on the day that a meeting was held. Now they didn't
want to disperse immediately after the meeting. They waited at the corner
to sing. And I went into the shop and bought what I was supposed to buy
and then when I left, next door to the shop the youth was throwing stones
at a house.

	The police was shooting at the people and I didn't manage to survive, I
was also shot with two pelletS that ultimately made me fall. While I was
still on the floor I heard another two shots and they went straight into
my leg MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	T MOLALE

and the other one was on my buttock and the other one was on my back. And
the last one on my head.

	Next to me a person saw that I had fallen and it wasn't only me, but we
were two. Now this person who saw us called for help and somebody came to
help. Mr Galeng was called to take us to the hospital.

	We managed to reach the hospital safely but the police were also waiting
for us. It was at about past six when the shooting took place but at the
hospital our parents were called to come and see us.

	We stayed in the hospital for two weeks under the Security guard. And
after that we were forced to sign a statement that we were the people who
threw stones at the Councillor's house, because the Councillor was not
wanted during the time.

	Because I wasn't involved in that incident I did not want to sign. I
didn't want to agree to what they were saying. I refused and they took us
then. They put us in something like a toilet. There was a tow bar on the
floor and for about ten minutes they sprayed us with teargas.

It was difficult to get out of that room. We were suffocating and our
faces were very hot. The saliva was just flowing out of our mouths and
the tears from our eyes.

	They came to pick us up and they assaulted us. They said we should take
out the people who were the leaders, the people who told us to throw
stones at that house. They took us to the cells for two weeks without any
charge and after that they said they will assault us again until we tell
them the truth.

	I went to the hospital and from the hospital I was

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	3	T MOLALE

sent to Kimberley and then I asked my parents to accompany me to
Kimberley. I was still under police guard.

	I stayed in Kimberley for two to three days. My parent was called and it
was my mother.

	From Kimberley we went to Bloemfontein. I was not in a stable condition.
The four pellets have been removed from my body but the other one was
still remaining in my body. At Bloemfontein they could not take the
pellet out of my body.

	I listened to stories that if I drink a lot of Coke the pellet would
stay in my body until they can be in a position to remove it.

	From the Baragwanath Hospital we came back home for the case, but after
that we were discharged. Nobody was found guilty.

	Thereafter I had a problem with the pellet that couldn't be removed from
my head. I was under treatment from a doctor at Vryburg. I had many
problems with this pellet that was in my head because I can't hear well
when someone speaks to me. I hear here and there and I can't see properly
with my eyes. Other things I can't remember because of the pellet that is
still in my head. It is also very problematic for me to remember of the
other events that occurred to me here and there.

CHAIRPERSON: I thank you, Thabiso.	How were you at that time?

MR MOLALE: I was about eleven or twelve years old. I was still in
standard two by then.

CHAIRPERSON: Were you in the group of the youth who were throwing stones.

MR MOLALE: No, I wasn't in that group. I was sent to

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	4	T MOLALE

the shop by my father.

CHAIRPERSON: Were you the same age as the youths who were throwing
stones, because there ages were ranging from nine to fourteen?

MR MOLALE: Yes, they were only up to 18.

CHAIRPERSON: What did the leaders from the Youth Organization and the
Civic Organization do to help you when the youth were in such trouble as
you were in?

MR MOLALE: The help I got was being picked up where I had fallen by Mr
Galeng, who is now a Mayor, who took me to the hospital at that time. I
was also helped by the other youth who was still around at that time.

CHAIRPERSON: I see here that you have travelled to many hospitals, even
up unto Bloemfontein. My question is, did you have a private doctor who
would remove the pellets which were in your body?

MR MOLALE: I couldn't hear your question clearly.

CHAIRPERSON: Didn't your family receive a private doctor who could help
to remove the pellets that were in your body?

MR MOLALE: All of them were removed, but the one that remained was in the
head and I was told that it wouldn't be removed because if it was
removed, I would die or be mentally ill. The other ones were removed
really.

CHAIRPERSON: You said you had hearing problems, you had sight problems.
When was it last that you went to a doctor regarding these problems?

MR MOLALE: That was after I was released from Koto's House, after I was
sent there by the ANC leadership and the UDF who were present at that
time.

	I only came to know when they went to inform the

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	5	T MOLALE

lawyers that they had a letter of what happened at that time.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, I have no more questions.

MR MALAN: Thabiso, how old are you now?

MR MOLALE: I am 22 years old now.

MR MALAN: When you went to the shop on that day, as you went to the shop
did you see the people at the Councillor's house. Was there a gathering
at the Councillor's house already as you were going there?

MR MOLALE: No, they were at the corner of the street, singing freedom
songs.

MR MALAN: Were they at the time still on their way to the Councillor's
house?

MR MOLALE: Yes, it seems like that.

MR MALAN: Can you remember what you went to buy for your father?

MR MOLALE: Yes, I can still remember. I went to buy candles and paraffin.

MR MALAN: And when you came out they were already throwing stones at the
house.

MR MOLALE: Yes, they were already throwing stones.

MR MALAN: And you didn't stop to watch the proceedings?

MR MOLALE: I was surprised at what was happening. During that time I
heard a gunshot and when I tried to run away I realised that I had been
shot and I couldn't run away and I fell down.

MR MALAN: Thank you.

DR RANDERA: Thabiso, from your statement it is not clear who shot you.
When you went to the shop and on your way back were the police
surrounding the Councillor's house. Who actually shot you?

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	6	T MOLALE

MR MOLALE: It was another policeman, they call him Odirile. He was with
the other one whom I don't know and I heard from people who were around
that when we were at the hospital there were police at the Councillor's
house.

DR RANDERA: ... is related to this hospitalization and the police guard.
What does it actually mean when you say you were under police guard at
the hospital. Did they have you on leg irons, were you ...?

MR MOLALE: No, they were just sitting around, because I was a very
injured person. We were three. I was not alone in the room we were in.
There were about two policemen who guarded us per day.

DR RANDERA: My last question. Where were all these other pellets?

MR MOLALE: They were not there on the first day that I arrived at the
hospital.

DR RANDERA: You say you were a very injured person. Where were all the
other pellets that were removed from your body? You say you've only got
one left in you head. Where were all the other pellets?

MR MOLALE: The other, two were in my leg, another one in my buttock, one
in my back and one was in the head. They could remove the other four,
besides the one that was in my head.

MS SEROKE: We thank you for coming to share with us your story. We trust
and hope that you will try to get back to life and accomplish your
ambitions.

	Who are you living with now?

MR MOLALE: I live with my grandmother.

MS SEROKE: Is that your grandmother next to you?

MR MOLALE: Yes.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	7	T MOLALE

MS SEROKE: Are you working?

MR MOLALE: I am not working.

MS SEROKE: I thank you for accompanying him.



	----------------------

