	1


	1

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		5.12.96		MOUTSE

CASE NUMBER:	JB02254		NAME: JOHANNES MONAGENG

JOHANNES MONAGENG (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Monageng, are you employedn now?

MR MONAGENG: I am unemployed, I am depending on the pension.

CHAIRPERSON: And what is your wife doing?

MR MONAGENG: She is also a pensioner.

CHAIRPERSON: Was Mogane, your grandchild, staying with you

MR MONAGENG: No, he was visiting us during that Christmas vacation. He
was staying with his mother and his father at Garankua.

CHAIRPERSON: Please relax, take your time. Are Mogane's parents still in
Garankua?

MR MONAGENG: Yes, they are still in Garankua.

CHAIRPERSON: Are they present today?

MR MONAGENG: No. I left the certificate at home, I didn't bring it along
because I was afraid it would get wet because of the rain.

CHAIRPERSON: I am sorry, we haven't come to that point yet. I was just
asking whether his parents are here today.

MR MONAGENG: No, they are not here with us today.

CHAIRPERSON: Now please tell us what happened.

MR MONAGENG: People who were fighting, some of them came to look for him,
then somebody came at the door and told me that there are children who
are at the mortuary in Groblersdal. I took a car and went there. I found
five

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	2	MONAGENG

corpses. Then I did find my grandson. Then the person responsible gave me
a letter, then I came back home. When I came home the comrades said that
that is our person, so we will see what to do. They took the paper, then
they said we will bury him.

CHAIRPERSON: The comrades said that?

MR MONAGENG: Yes, they did. They took the paper then they said that is
our corpse.

CHAIRPERSON: Was he at school when he was visiting you?

MR MONAGENG: Yes, he was attending school at Garankua.

CHAIRPERSON: How did it come that he was mixed with the youth where you
are staying, not in Garankua?

MR MONAGENG: His parents have a house where we are staying. In Garankua
they just go in there to work but they have a house where we are staying.

CHAIRPERSON: Who is staying at that house when they are at Garankua?

MR MONAGENG: Even now there is no person in that house. They only come
during holidays.

CHAIRPERSON: Therefore the comrades took the corpse. You didn't know
where they buried him?

MR MONAGENG: He was brought at home. I went even to the grave, I saw them
when they were burying him.

CHAIRPERSON: But you didn't know who killed Mogane, did you?

MR MONAGENG: We heard that they were shot on the mountain, (indistinct)
daughter said there were three. If this was Mogane's family I am a
witness because we were two when they were shot. When this man came and
said stop the boy ran and I stopped and they assaulted that little girl.
She said she will come back and make a statement but I haven't seen her

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	3	MONAGENG

so far.

CHAIRPERSON: Was she able to identify the people responsible?

MR MONAGENG: Those are the people who were fighting against the Ndebele
people.

CHAIRPERSON: Were the Ndebeles fighting the Ndebeles?

MR MONAGENG: It is Mbcoto in actual fact and they were fighting the
Moutse people.

CHAIRPERSON: This girl who told you, you haven't seen her?

MR MONAGENG: Yes, I haven't seen her. I last saw her in the office when
she told us what happened. We knew that he was shot at the mountain. It
is not this mountain, it is the mountain further down. It was the two of
us and then Mogane ran, then she remained behind.

CHAIRPERSON: The local friends of Mogane, do you know them?

MR MONAGENG: I would lie if I may tell who are his friends. I don't know
them.

CHAIRPERSON: You say Mogane was schooling at Garankua or here?

MR MONAGENG: No, at Garankua.

CHAIRPERSON: But he was friends with the youth around this area.

MR MONAGENG: Yes, because he used to come during holidays but he wasn't
staying here. He only came here during holidays.

CHAIRPERSON: What did Mogane's parents say after receiving the bad news,
did they attend the funeral?

MR MONAGENG: Yes, they attended the funeral.

CHAIRPERSON: Didn't they take any step to go to the police to investigate?

MR MONAGENG: No, all of us, not even one of us went to the

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	4	MONAGENG

police.

CHAIRPERSON: Now was there a reason for the parents not to go to the
police?

MR MONAGENG: No, I won't be in a position to give you an answer.

CHAIRPERSON: You say that they said they would bring the death
certificate. Didn't you follow this matter up?

MR MONAGENG: I went to submit the statement for the first time and the
second time I was then given this death certificate and they said to me
keep it in a safe place. I have put the certificate in a safe place but I
couldn't bring it with me today because I was scared of the rain that
this document would get wet.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. We hope that we will get the certificate in our
hands. It is very surprising why Mogane's parents didn't stand up to
follow up this matter. Do you have an idea maybe they were scared to
involve themselves in such issues?

MR MONAGENG: I do not know. I really don't know. His mother was already
here and the father was supposed to come on Good Friday. He went to the
station to come this way but unfortunately when he stepped out of the
train he was just hit by a car and he died also. That was in 1985.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you referring to Mogane's father?

MR MONAGENG: Yes, I am talking about Mogane's father.

CHAIRPERSON: Was he hit by a car?

MR MONAGENG: Yes, he was hit by a car. He was coming to see Mogane's
mother who was already here because of this incident and on his way to
this area that is where he met his fate.

CHAIRPERSON: How old was Mogane?

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	5	MONAGENG

MR MONAGENG: I won't be able to tell you. I am his uncle. CHAIRPERSON:
You don't even know which standard he was doing?

MR MONAGENG: No, you see they were residing very far and I was just
taking care of my cattle and I am not educated at all.

CHAIRPERSON: I thank you, I don't have questions.

MS SEROKE: Mr Monageng, you said Mogane was schooling at Attridgeville
and he used to come to Moutse during holidays.

MR MONAGENG: Yes, during Christmas holidays.

MS SEROKE: Did he have friends? Did he belong to any political
organisation?

MR MONAGENG: I do not know. Maybe he was involved in politics in Pretoria
and he knew about politics here. I don't know.

MS SEROKE: I heard you saying that the comrades told you that they will
take over with the funeral arrangements. Now I want to know whether he
was a member of any political organisation.

MR MONAGENG: The youth was fighting for their country, they were taken
out of their homes. The group took them out of their homes saying we are
fighting for our land. Every young person was taken out of their house,
boys and girls alike. They ignored us old men and women, they wouldn't
say anything to us.

MS SEROKE: What was the situation in your village, was there unrest?

MR MONAGENG: We only saw police getting into peoples' houses searching.
Those who had their traditional weapons they were not in their house,
they were far from their houses but the police would get into their
house, search

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	6	MONAGENG

everything, they would open wardrobes, they would get in every household
to search and that shocked me really on that day.

MS SEROKE: What were people fighting for? What is it that you were
against?

MR MONAGENG: The police were shooting us with the tear-gas and we were
just fainting. Most of us survived because we just used water to wipe the
tear-gas off our faces.

MS SEROKE: I thank you, sir.

MR ALLY: Tata, thank you very much for coming to speak to us. We have
heard so many of these stories of people caught up in this conflict and
the tragedy of this decision of incorporation where before that the
testimony that we hear is that people lived together quite harmoniously.
There may have been tensions and difficulties but there was very little
conflict and very little violence between Moutse people, Peddie people,
Ndebele people. But once this decision about incorporation was made and
forced onto people the whole area erupted into violence and conflict and
there were so many tragic and so many senseless deaths. Now there is very
little that anyone can say to someone who has lost a loved one but maybe
when one understands the background and the history maybe that can be of
some assistance. It can't take away the pain but maybe can bring about
some understanding and it seems that in the case of your nephew as well
was one of those deaths which took place as a result of this conflict,
during this conflict. You say in your statement that the witness says
that it was the South African Police. When we don't have anything
specific to go on other than just a general statement like that it is
very difficult for investigation because one doesn't know which

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	7	MONAGENG

member or which unit but we are trying to follow up on every statement to
follow up on every lead but the most important thing really is for people
to come forward if they believe that loved ones have been victims,
suffered gross human rights violations so that when we make a report at
the end of the life of the Commission to the President and through him to
parliament, then that account of what happened to your family member, to
your nephew can be in that report and it is then the responsibility of
government to decide whether the recommendations which the commission
makes, whether those recommendations will be followed through so that
something can be done for those who actually lost their lives during the
conflict over the last 33 years, the period covered by the Commission. So
thank you for coming and sharing what must have been a difficult and
painful experience. Thank you very much.

	------------------------

