
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	11 JUNE 1997	

NAME: 	MXOLISI ANTHONY MONAKALI

CASE:		EC62/96	-	MDANTSANE

DAY:		3

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------

CHAIRPERSON: Mandla Engalani. Mxolisi Monakali.

REV XUNDU: Mxolisi Monakali, I would like to swear you in. Please stand
up.

MXOLISI ANTHONY MONAKALI: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Properly sworn in.

CHAIRPERSON: You are welcome Mr Monakali. Mr Sandi will lead you in
evidence on behalf of the Commission.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Monakali, you are going to talk
about Mxolisi Anthony Monakali. Is that so?

MR MONAKALI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: How are you related?

MR MONAKALI: That is myself.

ADV SANDI: What is your story?

MR MONAKALI: Can I proceed?

ADV SANDI: Yes.

MR MONAKALI: I was in a boxing tournament in 1981, fifth of June. This
boxing tournament was in David Mama High School, NU1. That proceeded
well. On the morning of the sixth of June Mr Mlandu, that I know well
from the neighbourhood, got into the school hall and reprimanded us for
making noise. He got, he beat up a girl quite badly. Everybody was
scared. The tournament organisers begged him to let them be. Apparently
one of the clubs that was going to come was a visiting club and,
therefore, they had to prepare well. 	Mr Mlandu then left saying he is
coming back. He came back with a huge gun, got into the hall. Some people
jumped out of the windows, pulled open the door. I was one of the people
who were able to run away. I ran away with a friend, Jonglizwe Sipoenzi.
We got to a friend's place where we were going to sleep. However, it was
locked. We went back to David Mama, because it was lit and it was, quite
a bit of noise. We went back there. As David Mama had two blocks I went
to the one and he went to the other. There were people surrounding a
bakkie. I think that bakkie was the transport used by the visiting
boxers. Not far from the hall door I heard a noise. I ran away. A second
gunshot, I heard just, I got shot on my side and I fell down on a, the
field in David Mama.

ADV SANDI: Mr Monakali, who was shooting?

MR MONAKALI: Mr Mlandu was shooting.

ADV SANDI: You got injured on your arm?

MR MONAKALI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Is there any part, any other part of your anatomy that you got
injured in?

MR MONAKALI: Yes, around my waist. My kidneys were injured. Especially
the one that had to be removed.

ADV SANDI: Could you tell us how badly your arm was injured.

MR MONAKALI: I could see my muscles and bones. There was an operation,
grafting my skin from my, back of my thigh onto my arm.

ADV SANDI: How long did you stay in hospital?

MR MONAKALI: About two months.

ADV SANDI: Which hospital was this?

MR MONAKALI: Cecilia Makiwane.

ADV SANDI: You did not go to any other hospital?

MR MONAKALI: No, I just went to Dr van Niekerk with my mother to, for him
to examine my arm.

ADV SANDI: Who was your legal representative?

MR MONAKALI: Mr Mxenge came with my mother at the hospital. ADV SANDI: Is
this the late Mr Mxenge?

MR MONAKALI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: He took down your details?

MR MONAKALI: Yes, he did.

ADV SANDI: What eventually happened?

MR MONAKALI: Because he worked in Durban he referred us to Mr Siwisa.
When we were called to come on the Saturday to meet Mr Siwisa he told us
that Mr Mxenge had passed on.

ADV SANDI: You said that Mr Louw took over at some point. Where is Mr
Louw from?

MR MONAKALI: It is Dr van Niekerk whom we had spoken to that referred us
to Mr Louw. I gave Mr Louw my file from the hospital and he took a
statement.

ADV SANDI: Is he an attorney from East London?

MR MONAKALI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Is he still around?

MR MONAKALI: I do not know. I will look around, I have tried to look
around, but I have not found him.

ADV SANDI: Did Mr Louw help you through your claim?

MR MONAKALI: When we went with my mother we did not find him. He was, he
had moved from that building. We tried to find him, because the then
occupant of the building did not know this Mr Louw.

ADV SANDI: Are you saying that he disappeared?

MR MONAKALI: Yes, he did. He did not even let us know anything, I mean,
he had all our details including our addresses.

ADV SANDI: Did Mr Louw work with any other attorneys?

MR MONAKALI: I only met with him once when Dr van Niekerk had arranged
it. I tried to find Mr van, Dr van Niekerk, but he had moved to Great
Britain.

ADV SANDI: In our statements, in your statement before us you have
requests. Could you briefly tell us about these?

MR MONAKALI: If I could help, if I could get help where my health is
concerned. I hurt now and again physically and losing a part of my body
at such a young age.

ADV SANDI: You say that you were 15 when all this happened?

MR MONAKALI: Yes, I was 15.

ADV SANDI: Is that all?

MR MONAKALI: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Monakali. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: June Crichton.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Can you hear me Mr Monakali?

MR MONAKALI: Yes.

MS CRICHTON: Just two questions to you. When Mlandu came in to shoot, was
he on his own or were there other police with him?

MR MONAKALI: He was on his own.

MS CRICHTON: Had he ever been at boxing tournaments before, that you had
seen?

MR MONAKALI: It was not the first time there was a boxing tournament at
David Mama.

MS CRICHTON: No, my question to you was had you seen him at boxing
tournaments before?

MR MONAKALI: No Mam.

MS CRICHTON: So your statement is that he came into that hall and without
any warning he began to shoot?

MR MONAKALI: He did not shoot the first time, because he was not armed.
Then we dispersed. I also left. He only started shooting after we had
come back again.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Monakali, were you a member of a political organisation
at that time?

MR MONAKALI: No, I was a boxer at the time.

CHAIRPERSON: Was there political unrest at the time?

MR MONAKALI: It was just a boxing tournament at the school.

CHAIRPERSON: According to your statement you were shot at because you
were making a noise.

MR MONAKALI: The tournament was around senior boxers final matches,
therefore people were excited. There was a lot of noise.

CHAIRPERSON: Were the people toy-toying?

MR MONAKALI: No, there was no toy-toy. It was just experienced first
class boxers that were, that was exciting the people.

CHAIRPERSON: In your perception do you think this matter is politically
orientated?

MR MONAKALI: It was wickedness. I, there, I would see no reason why he
shot. He said that he did not want any boxing tournaments at schools,
because the Department of Education in Ciskei was concerned that the
school furniture was being spoilt. That, those are one of the major
reasons that he brought forward.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. We will look at this case closely. Maybe we will
come back to you with more detail, because as a Commission, we are
looking closely at political conflicts. We are going to ascertain how
politically orientated your matter is or perhaps we should hand this case
over to a Court of Law as just any other normal crime. However, we will
look closely at this matter and we will let you know. Thank you for now.

	------------------------------

