	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		24.09.1996		NAME: EVELYN M MORAKE

CASE NUMBER: 1526 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 2

_________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: If I can ask Mrs Morake now to stand to take the oath, please.

EVELYN M MORAKE: (Duly sworn, states).

DR RANDERA: Thank you, Mrs Morake. Are you all right, Mrs Morake?

MRS MORAKE: I am okay, thank you.

DR RANDERA: You seem to be in a lot of pain. Mrs Morake, would you prefer
if Cynthia was the only person who spoke and you just listened?

MRS MORAKE: She can carry on with the speech, because she witnessed
everything, she is actually the complainant, she was not present when I
gave the statement.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Morake, will you please put the mike in front of Cynthia
then.

	Cynthia Kedibone Morake, Commissioner Yasmin Sooka will be helping you
in telling your statement, and I hand you over to her. Thank you.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. Cynthia, I would like to welcome you to our
proceedings today. Before you begin to tell us about what happened on
that day, tell us how old you were, whether you were at school, whether
you were working at the time, please. If you could give us a few details
about yourself.

MS MORAKE: I was not schooling, I was staying with my

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	C K MORAKE

mother.

MS SOOKA: How old were you at the time?

MS MORAKE: I was 18 years old.

MS SOOKA: Were you a member of a political organisation, were you a
comrade?

MS MORAKE: There were no organisations, therefore I didn't belong to any
organisation.

MS SOOKA: Do you want to tell us about what happened to you?

MS MORAKE: On that day in 1986 there was a song, then after the song, I
was not there, these children who were singing passed through our gate.
They were passing at our gate with my sister. I was standing at the gate
with my mother and my sister. Then after the lights were off, then we
went into the house, then we slept. There was no problem.

	At about three o'clock in the morning one man entered the house with a
White policeman. When he entered he said he wants Kedibone. My mother
said here she is. Then she lighted with a torch. Then he told me that
what did I do. I said I did not do anything. Then he said were you there
when the youth were singing. Then I said no, I was not there. Then he
said come, you will talk at the office. Then they took me, they put me in
the police car. I didn't know who hit me on the head. After I was hit
they took me to the police off. Thereafter they locked me up. We were
five ladies. Thereafter they took us to the police station at Makwassie.
That is where we were interrogated. They were hitting us with open hands.

	What is painful is that we were beaten by Whites with balaclavas. They
were tall, they were hefty, we didn't know them.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	C K MORAKE

MS SOOKA: Take your time.

MS MORAKE: Just a second, please.

MS SOOKA: It is all right, she can take her time. Cynthia, take your
time, don't worry.

MS MORAKE: Our mothers came to look for us. They brought us food. In the
afternoon at about three o'clock to Stilfontein. When we arrived there
they threw tear-gas at us. Then we went to Stilfontein. We arrived there
at about six o'clock. Then they took our names down. They asked us our
age. Thereafter they beat us. Then they took us to the cells. We didn't
know the Stilfontein town. I didn't know which cell did we go to, but it
was the open one which was open. It had no lights. All of us went in
there. Then they were beating us in the dark. Then they said what do you
want to do in a dark cell. But we didn't know where to go.

	They took us out and then they separated us. They took the boys to
another room and us to the other room. The other day they poured water
over us. Then they made us to sleep on the floor. They poured water over
us. From there they made us stand and poured water over us. They made a
circle with cars and then they were beating us with plastic batons.

	On Saturday they released us. They were beating us again. They told us
to go home on foot. Then we met a certain man who took us. That is the
end.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Cynthia. I am just going to ask you a few questions
so that we can make sure that we have got your story down clearly. If I
hear you correctly, you say that you, your sister and your mother were
standing by the gate when the young people came past singing freedom
songs.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	C K MORAKE

Is that correct?

MS MORAKE: Yes, it is true, they were singing freedom songs.

MS SOOKA: You yourself were not part of that group?

MS MORAKE: To tell you the truth, I was not even part of that group.

MS SOOKA: The name of the policeman who came to fetch you at night, who
was that?

MS MORAKE: That's Scheepers.

MS SOOKA: And he took you to a police station before he took you to
Stilfontein. What was the name of that station?

MS MORAKE: They put us on an open ground at Lebaleng.

MS SOOKA: How many of you were there?

MS MORAKE: We were ten girls, I don't remember how many boys were there,
it was a group, there were many.

MS SOOKA: How long were you kept there before they took you away?

MS MORAKE: At the Stilfontein police station?

MS SOOKA: Yes.

MS MORAKE: We were taken on Thursday in the morning, at about three
o'clock in the afternoon we were taken to Stilfontein. At Stilfontein we
stayed for three days there.

MS SOOKA: During that time did they allow you to make any telephone calls
to your mother or any other person?

MS MORAKE: Since I left my mother, when she came to see us on Thursday
morning.

MS SOOKA: In your statement you say that you were tortured at the
Stilfontein police station. Could you tell us exactly what that torture
was?

MS MORAKE: I have continuous headaches, I still have a mark here on my
head, because they hit me with something, I do

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	C K MORAKE

not know what it was.

MS SOOKA: Did they hit you with their hands or did they hit you with this
plastic baton on your head?

MS MORAKE: They used that plastic baton, I think on my head and then they
were using their hands and feet to assault us.

MS SOOKA: How many of them were there?

MS MORAKE: Where?

MS SOOKA: (Speaker's mike not on).

MS MORAKE: I don't know where those policemen came from, they were in
large numbers, they were heavily built, very tall.

MS SOOKA: (Speaker's mike not on). When they poured water over you, is
this outside of the cell, because you mention that they formed a circle
with cars?

MS MORAKE: It was behind the cells on the lawn. We were made to lie on
the lawn. They took us out of the cells, in the back yard of the police
station. We were lying on the lawn.

MS SOOKA: With your face down?

MS MORAKE: Yes, we were lying face down and they were pouring water on
our backs.

MS SOOKA: What did they use to pour the water?

MS MORAKE: They used a hose pipe.

MS SOOKA: And afterwards they beat you with these plastic batons or the
plastic sjambok or a plastic baton?

MS MORAKE: Those were plastic sjamboks.

MS SOOKA: How long were you at Stilfontein?

MS MORAKE: I stayed three days at Stilfontein.

MS SOOKA: Once you were released, did you report this to the police or
did you go and see an attorney or did you have a doctor examine you? Can
you tell us?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	C K MORAKE

MS MORAKE: Later on my mother took me to the doctor because of these
terrible headaches. We were so scared of policemen we wouldn't even dare
go to them.

MS SOOKA: What did the doctor say?

MS MORAKE: He said I have a terrible headache. He said my head got cold.

MS SOOKA: Do you receive treatment now for your headaches?

MS MORAKE: I have this continuous headache and every time I have this
headache I have to go to the doctor, isn't it? And it is a terrible
headache, I must say.

MS SOOKA: Cynthia, at the time when you were staying with your mother
before this happened, were you working at the time?

MS MORAKE: I wasn't working. In the previous year I left school and I was
schooling at Wolmaransstad. The school ended with Std 8. They did their
Std 9 and I couldn't further my studies because my mother is just a poor
woman.

MS SOOKA: Do you work now?

MS MORAKE: I am not working.

MS SOOKA: Does your mother support you?

MS MORAKE: Yes, she is supporting all of us.

MS SOOKA: Tell me, in your statement you talk about the policeman who
took you, as being Piet Scheepers, and in your mother's statement she
mentions the name of a policeman called April, who also assaulted you. Is
that correct?

MS MORAKE: That's correct, April assaulted us at Stilfontein. When they
released us, and told us to leave on foot, we met him on our way. He was
driving in a van and we wanted to run away. He stopped us. He said you
must tell my family at Makwassie that April has died and he has been
killed by the comrades.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	C K MORAKE

MS SOOKA: (Speaker's mike not on).

MS MORAKE: At the Coloured area near Klerksdorp.

MS SOOKA: Do you know whether this April still works in the police force?

MS MORAKE: I do not know, I since last saw him on that day.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Cynthia. Mamma, Morake, do you want to add - sorry,
Cynthia, do you want add anything to what you have said?

MS MORAKE: Are you referring to myself or my mother?

MS SOOKA: Cynthia.

MS MORAKE: I just want to thank the Commission, because we have been
keeping these things to ourselves. We couldn't expose the kind of life we
used to lead. Maybe after taking out this whole thing I will be very
relieved. I thank you.

MS SOOKA: Mamma Morake, do you want to add anything or are you happy with
what Cynthia has said?

MRS MORAKE: I just want to add to what Kedibone has just said. These
things happened a long time ago and I am a bit forgetful, but she told me
about the torture at Stilfontein, how they were poured with water. But
there is another man called Thomas Mogatse of Makwassie who passed away.
He was not a policeman, he was just a worker. But he was one of those
people who was taken to point out our children. I was so scared of the
police. I didn't want to say anything to the police. I just asked them
what did she do. I said to them she was not present as they were chanting
songs, because I was scared, I thought they would hit us all in the
house. I don't want to say anything further, because she experienced the
trouble from home to Stilfontein. And I want to thank you. And I want to
thank you for your presence today. We, for the first time we listen to

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	C K MORAKE

ourselves, but you know as I saw you, I got scared, because you know, we
still have that legacy of being scared of people. But I want to thank you
that I took out this heavy burden. May God empower you to help people in
this country. Thank you.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Mamma. Before we let you go I am going to ask the
other Commissioners if they want to ask you questions.

DR RANDERA: Kedibone, you said that there was no organisation in
Lebaleng, but on the day that you were arrested, the young people were
singing songs in the street. What was that all about?

MS MORAKE: There were no organisations, they were just singing.

DR RANDERA: Was that usual?

MS MORAKE: No, it was the first time.

DR RANDERA: Were they celebrating anything on that day?

MS MORAKE: I don't remember, I can't even tell, but there wasn't any
celebration. They passed in our street singing and thereafter it was
quiet and we went into the house and we were relaxing. This thing started
in the evening when we saw lights going off.

DR RANDERA: And all the questioning at Makwassie police station and at
Stilfontein police station, at Makwassie I think you said that the people
had balaclavas on, but they were big, heavy men, White people. Were they
asking you to admit to something, did they accuse you of doing something?
What were they torturing and assaulting you for?

MS MORAKE: The cause of the assault, I think, was just the freedom songs.
I think the singing led to our assault.

DR RANDERA: Do you know what they were after? Or were they

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	C K MORAKE

just trying to teach you a lesson for singing freedom songs?

MS MORAKE: I do not know.

DR RANDERA: You said that out of the group of young people that were
arrested that night in Lebaleng, you were first taken to an open area. It
was June and June is a very cold part of our year. How long did they keep
you out in the veld or in the field?

MS MORAKE: What do you refer to, Sir, when you are saying the open field,
what do you mean?

DR RANDERA: Sorry, you said to Commissioner Sooka earlier on, that when
they picked up all these young people, before they took you to Makwassie
police station, they took you to an open field. Is that right?

MS MORAKE: Lebaleng is the name of our township. They took us from the
house and they took us to the office at Makwassie. Lebaleng, I was
referring to the township.

DR RANDERA: Thank you. Now with all these young women who were there, was
there any other form of torture that they used against you?

MS MORAKE: No, they only assaulted us an poured water over us.

DR RANDERA: And then at the end of that period, did I hear you rightly,
that you were in Stilfontein.

MS MORAKE: Yes.

DR RANDERA: They just said to you get out, find your own way home?

MS MORAKE: That's what they said. And before they could release us, they
assaulted us. I think each girl got five lashes and each boy got ten
lashes and thereafter they said go.

DR RANDERA: Can you give us the names of any of these other KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	C K MORAKE

young people?

MS MORAKE: Yes, I can give you the names.

DR RANDERA: When you give your statement to the statement-taker, will you
please add those names? Thank you very much.

MS SOOKA: Piet?

PROF MEIRING: Kedibone, only one question. You said that you still have
continuous headaches and your health is not very good, but you do not
have work. If work is found for you will you be able to work or are you
unable to work?

MS MORAKE: I think I can work because it doesn't attack me every time, it
is just on occasion.

CHAIRPERSON: Kedibone, I would like to thank you and your mother for
coming here today to share what happened to you at your township with us.
We hope that we are going to move towards a future where we can rely on
those who are meant to protect us, to actually do so. We are sorry that
at such a young age you had to go through what you did, because there is
no doubt that the beatings have had an effect on you, as well as the
treatment that you were given. We are grateful that you have given us the
names of those who were involved in this, and the Commission will be
investigating that. Thank you for coming today to share with us what
happened with you.



	---------------











KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

