	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		25.09.1996	NAME: KGASHOANE D MOTSAMAI

CASE NUMBER: 1541 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

TAPE STARTS IN MIDDLE OF QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS





MR MANTHATA: All right. Let's proceed and find out how, in which way were
people torturing you? What did they do to you?

MR MOTSAMAI: They arrested me and took me to the police station and they
beat me on the face and then my face was swollen and then I was
electrocuted.

MR MANTHATA: Where did they electrocute you on the body?

MR MOTSAMAI: It was for a long time, they put me in a sack and they
electrocuted me.

MR MANTHATA: After that?

MR MOTSAMAI: After that they took me - after that they took me to
Bougroep.

MR MANTHATA: What is Bougroep?

MR MOTSAMAI: It is a prison in Potchefstroom.

MR MANTHATA: Were you sentenced when you were sent to prison?

MR MOTSAMAI: I was there for six months.

MR MANTHATA: I was saying you were there for six months because you were
sentenced?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, I was sentenced.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	K D MOTSAMAI

MR MANTHATA: Did you appear in court?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, I did appear in court.

MR MANTHATA: Who represented you?

MR MOTSAMAI: I was represented by the lawyer, I have forgotten his name.
I had a lawyer.

MR MANTHATA: You don't remember that lawyer?

MR MOTSAMAI: No, I don't remember that lawyer.

MR MANTHATA: Is there no paper which may remind you, make you remember
the name of that person?

MR MOTSAMAI: I will ask when I arrive at home.

MR MANTHATA: After that six months what happened?

MR MOTSAMAI: Then I was released and then they brought me home.

MR MANTHATA: You were there when people were burning the hall?

MR MOTSAMAI: No, I was looking when the hall was burning.

MR MANTHATA: Were you the only one who was arrested by the police at that
time at that place?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, I was the only, I was the first to be arrested at that
time and they took me.

MR MANTHATA: When you are saying you are the first one, were others
arrested thereafter?

MR MOTSAMAI: I am not sure, I don't know whether others were arrested.

MR MANTHATA: After you were beaten and before you went to court, did you
see a doctor or were you taken to a hospital?

MR MOTSAMAI: No, I didn't see the doctor, I was not examined by the
doctor.

MR MANTHATA: After, as you have come here to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, what have you lost, which do you think, through the help of
this Commission, we may try and

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	K D MOTSAMAI

investigate to try to get that back?

MR MOTSAMAI: My body has been affected because of electrocution and I am
unable to work and I am getting a subsistence allowance from the
Government.

MR MANTHATA: When you say you are unemployed, which part of your body do
you have a problem with?

MR MOTSAMAI: The body becomes painful.

DR RANDERA: Thank you, Mr Manthata. Prof Meiring?

PROF MEIRING: Mr Motsamai, just a few questions. You are 27 years old. Is
that correct?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: Are you married?

MR MOTSAMAI: No, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: Do you have children dependent upon you?

MR MOTSAMAI: I have no children, sir.

PROF MEIRING: May I just come back to what Mr Manthata also asked about
your work. Is it totally impossible for you to do any work?

MR MOTSAMAI: It is totally impossible, because I am undergoing treatment
every month. Then I get injections and I am giving pills and monthly I
get that subsistence allowance.

PROF MEIRING: Where do you get that treatment?

MR MOTSAMAI: At the Commissioner, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: Is that at a hospital or at a clinic?

MR MOTSAMAI: That is a clinic, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: It is a clinic. And is there a specific doctor that takes
care of you, if we want to go and ask for your files?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, Sir, there is a doctor.

PROF MEIRING: What is the doctor's name?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	K D MOTSAMAI

MR MOTSAMAI: Goskie.

PROF MEIRING: And is that in Potchefstroom?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, Sir, it is Potchefstroom.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you. A last question. When did you leave school, in
which standard?

MR MOTSAMAI: I left school when I was doing Std 3 in 1993.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Prof Meiring. Daniel, I just want you to relax, you
are looking too tense, okay? Take your time in answering your questions.
We don't want to frighten you, there is nothing to be frightened about.
All right? Good, that's better.

	Daniel, I want to come back to 1985. What was happening in Ikhutseng
township? I mean you have mentioned in your statement that there was the
burning of the Kamathlape hall. What else was happening in Ikhutseng
township at the time?

MR MOTSAMAI: People were fighting and people were throwing cars with
stones.

DR RANDERA: (Speaker's mike not on).

MR MOTSAMAI: It was the comrades, they were fighting against the high
rent.

DR RANDERA: So there was a rent increase, were there also local
councillors in Ikhutseng that people were against?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, Sir, there were councillors and people didn't want that.

DR RANDERA: So were there also attacks on houses of councillors and
policemen at the time, and police women? I know it is a long time ago,
but you can take your time.

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, councillors' houses were attacked.

MR MOTSAMAI: And you were 16 years old at the time. Is that KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	K D MOTSAMAI

right?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes. Yes, Sir.

DR RANDERA: 1969?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, that's true, Sir.

DR RANDERA: So the police, when they arrested you, they took you to the
police station in Potchefstroom or in Ikhutseng?

MR MOTSAMAI: In Potchefstroom, Sir.

DR RANDERA: You mentioned the name of Pappa Kisibi.

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes.

DR RANDERA: As one of the people whom you recognised? He was a policeman,
was he?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, he was a policeman.

DR RANDERA: Were there any other policemen that you recognised that were
involved in your torture?

MR MOTSAMAI: I only remember Pappa Kisibi, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Now the torture period that you were subjected to, how long
did that last for?

MR MOTSAMAI: I was tortured for a long time. They were beating me on the
face and my face was swollen and I was electrocuted.

DR RANDERA: A long time, are you talking about hours or days?

MR MOTSAMAI: I am talking about hours, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Thank you. Then during that time or even after the torture,
did you ask to be see by a doctor?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, I saw a doctor thereafter, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Do you remember the name of the doctor?

MR MOTSAMAI: The doctor?

DR RANDERA: Do you remember the name of the doctor?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, I remember the doctor, Sir.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	K D MOTSAMAI

DR RANDERA: What was his name?

MR MOTSAMAI: Staftabu.

DR RANDERA: Daniel, you say that you spent six months in jail. Now
between the arrest that took place, were you first released and then you
had to go through a court case or did they just throw you into prison
after that?

MR MOTSAMAI: I was released, then I was taken to court.

DR RANDERA: How long were you out of prison for, between that first
arrest and then the court case?

MR MOTSAMAI: I think it is four days, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Was the court case immediately after that?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, there was a court case.

DR RANDERA: How many of you were charged in that court case? Who was with
you? Were you the only one?

MR MOTSAMAI: I was alone, Sir.

DR RANDERA: And what was the charge?

MR MOTSAMAI: The charge was to tell why that hall was burnt.

DR RANDERA: So you were found guilty of actually burning the hall or
public violence?

MR MOTSAMAI: I was convicted for public violence, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Daniel, is there anything else you want to say?

MR MOTSAMAI: There is nothing I want to add, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Can I ask you one more question, or two more questions,
actually. The one is, were you a member of the Youth Congress at the time
in Ikhutseng? I know you said you are a member of the ANC, were you also
a member of the Youth Congress? You said you were a comrade.

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, I was a member of the Youth Congress, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Daniel, you talked earlier on with Mr Manthata

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	K D MOTSAMAI

and Prof Piet Meiring about the medical treatment that you are receiving
on a monthly basis. Can you please tell us a little bit more about this
medical treatment. Is it for psychological, psychiatric problems?

MR MOTSAMAI: It is physical treatment and psychological treatment, Sir.

DR RANDERA: After that time when you were actually tortured, have you had
to spend time in hospital for these problems?

MR MOTSAMAI: I never slept in the hospital, but I went to the hospital
later.

DR RANDERA: What did you spend time in hospital for?

MR MOTSAMAI: For them, after the torture and electrocution, Sir.

MR MANTHATA: I didn't know when I was talking with you, that maybe you
were frightened. Is that so? Because I asked you in regard to the doctor.
That after the torture, did you go to the doctor. Then you said no.

MR MOTSAMAI: I didn't go immediately. I sat for some days and then
thereafter I went to the doctor.

MR MANTHATA: Then when I asked you who the doctor is, you couldn't
remember the doctor, but now when Dr Randera asked you about the doctor,
then you come with the name, then you said it is Thabo. That is why I am
asking you that if you were frightened when I was first talking to you?

MR MOTSAMAI: No, I was not frightened.

MR MANTHATA: Did you just forget?

MR MOTSAMAI: Yes, I just forgot some other issues.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you.

DR RANDERA: Daniel, I would like to thank you for coming here today. We
have listened to your story. We - I would

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	K D MOTSAMAI

also like to note, I think - and I speak now as a professional medical
person, I think that you need to speak to our people from the reparation
and rehabilitation committee especially, so that we can give you whatever
assistance that is possible, but we will make further enquriies on what
you have told us today and we will come back to you. Thank you very much
for coming.





	------------











































KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

