	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		23.09.1996		NAME: JACOB MOTSAU

CASE NUMBER: 01337 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 1

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Jacob Motsau. Order, please! Order, please! Tomorrow,
maybe people from Motesane would be able to put up a stage so that those
at the back should see clearly those who are giving evidence.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mosau, good afternoon. Mr MOsau, you are accompanied by a
gentleman on your right-hand side. Could you please introduce him to us.

MR MOTSAU: That's my brother, Siwile Motsau is the one who is the one who
is elder to me.

DR RANDERA: Mr Motsau, you are coming to tell us about yourself and what
happened to you in 1986. Commissioner Potgieter is going to be helping
you. Could you please stand to take the oath.

JACOB MOTSAU: (Duly sworn, states).

ADV POTGIETER: Thank you, Dr Randera. Good afternoon again, Mr Motsau.
Welcome here.

	Your evidence relates to an incident that happened on the 5th of April
of 1986, when you were shot and which resulted in your present condition
of being disabled. Now before we talk about that, perhaps just a little
bit of your personal circumstances. We have your date of birth as the
17th of April of 1956. Is that correct?

MR MOTSAU: Yes, Sir.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	MR MOTSAU

ADV POTGIETER: And you are married?

MR MOTSAU: Yes, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Any dependants, any children?

MR MOTSAU: The one who is with his mother. I am just looking after my
brother, he is not working. So the money, the disability allowance that I
get, I support my wife. I don't have money to buy a wheelchair. Wherever
I go I have problems. When I go out of the gate, when I go to town and
when I go out, I have got to be accompanied by somebody. I spend more
because I am paying for two people.

ADV POTGIETER: Are you in receipt of a disability grant? Is that correct,
State disability grant.

MR MOTSAU: I get disability funds, yes.

ADV POTGIETER: Now let's talk a bit more about the actual shooting
incident. It happened, as we have said, on the 5th of April 1986. In
fact, it seems a few days before your birthday. Your birthday is on the
17th of April.

MR MOTSAU: Yes, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Yes?

MR MOTSAU: It was on the 5th of April, it was about quarter to eight, I
was from my sister's house going to my house. I heard people singing and
shooting. I was on my way home. When I was on my way home, I saw people,
among them Bennet Matshaba, there were two having guns. Then they pointed
with that gun. Then I turned back, I took another street. Then they shot
me at the back just on the spine. The other one went under my arm-pit and
it is still there. Thereafter, where I fell, my brother came to pick me
up. When he was coming to pick me up, they said leave that person,
otherwise we are going to shoot you again. Then he said shoot me, because
he used to - then he picked me up.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	MR MOTSAU

Then we jumped some fences. Then we went to the taxis. On our way out of
the location, we met one of these police vans. Then they stopped the taxi
which we were in. Inside that van there were soldiers. Then they told the
taxi driver to stop. Then they said where are you going. Then the driver
said we are going to the hospital. Then they said why are you going to
the hospital? Then he said I am taking this person to the hospital
because he is shot. They said "shit", take him out and put him in the
van. Then those people who were in the taxi they took me to that police
van or military van.

	When we arrived at the police station then they said those people who
were in that van should take me out into the police station. When we
arrived there we made me sleep on the waiting bench. There was somebody
who was sleeping on that bench. I didn't look at that person's face and
he was dead and they made me sleep next to him and they were pointing
with those guns at me. They said why don't you die. Then anyone would
say, they would kick me and then point with guns, and they would say
close your eyes. I didn't want to close my eyes. Then I just said let
them shoot me and finish me.

	Thereafter, I think the station commander who was the leader of that
police station at the time, said to them take the dead one to another
place. Then they moved me. Then I see that that person that I was
sleeping next to was dead. Then I could see the pins were opening, then I
could see that this person is being thrown. At that time I was crying
inside. The one who was in charge said this one seems to still have some
strength, take him to the hospital.

	Then when the ambulance came they put on some drips and KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	MR MOTSAU

took me to the hospital. Inside that ambulance, one of them was escorting
me, it was a soldier with a big gun and sitting with me in the ambulance,
up to the hospital.	

When we arrived there, that soldier went back with the ambulance.

	Then I was admitted to the hospital. Then the doctor examined me. He
said I will not be able to walk again for the rest of my life, I will be
using a wheelchair for the rest of my life, but my hands are strong.

	Thereafter, whilst I was still in the hospital, when my relatives were
visiting me, they said to me the police are not making them to sleep,
they are asking where I am, they are looking for me. Another time the
doctor said to me - I was having some few months in the hospital and the
doctor said I am strong, I may go home and start to practise to use the
wheelchair.

	On a Friday I went home. Then I was supposed to come back on the Monday.
I didn't go back on the Monday, I came back on the Sunday. The Sunday
evening the police came looking for me, because they saw that I was at
home. They came three or four times.

	When I was discharged from the hospital I was working and where I was
working at Cash 'n Carry, the company, I was using a wheelchair at work.
I made a statement to Brady & Roelfs. Then I made a civil claim against
the person who shot me. They gave me Cyril Silent to be my lawyer. Then
he was saying he is making a claim for R300 000,00. Even up to now I
don't know what happened, I don't know where to find him. I was still
working.

	Then this Bennet Matshaba came to me again with another White man, and
they told me that they are coming to pick me

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	MR MOTSAU

up to make a statement because I have been arrested, because I am the
leader of the comrades. I was arriving about five metres, leading 500
people. I refuted that because I am not going, I will not go with you, I
will come tomorrow, tell me where I should go. They said I should come to
the magistrate's courts and they told me the room number. Then I came
first to Brady, then I met Cyril. Then he said I should go, I must not be
afraid.

	When I arrived there, I came back from Cyril, and then I know that they
said I should not make a statement. But they told me, showed me the whole
statement which had been written. During that case they said I was
convicted for two years. The magistrate said he knows that I have made a
civil claim against the State, but he sentenced me for two years.

	After I came out of prison - I spent two months in prison. Thereafter I
tried to find out where can I get help. Up to now I tried by all means, I
couldnt' find help anywhere.

ADV POTGIETER: I would just like to ask a few questions to get more
details about the incident and the evidence that you gave. Where did the
shooting incident happen, where were you shot? In which street was it, in
which township?

MR MOTSAU: It happened at Kanana, at Bennet Matshaba Street. Bennet
Matshaba was in his yard, under the trees.

ADV POTGIETER: What was the situation like in the Kanana Township at that
stage?

MR MOTSAU: It was not peaceful. I could hear some songs and gun shots.

ADV POTGIETER: Was there unrest in the township, riots, as they said?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	MR MOTSAU

MR MOTSAU: Yes, it was full of riots.

ADV POTGIETER: You were saying that you were on your way home. Were you
alone?

MR MOTSAU: I was going home, I was from work, but I passed somewhere. I
used to say somewhere with my family in the afternoon.

ADV POTGIETER: Do I understand you correctly, there was nobody else with
you when you were shot, you were on your own.

MR MOTSAU: I was alone, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Now this Bennet Matshaba that you referred to, what does
he do, what kind of work?

MR MOTSAU: He is a policeman, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: Where, in Orkney?

MR MOTSAU: Yes, Sir.

MR MOTSAU: Is he still a policeman there?

MR MOTSAU: He is still a policeman, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: He was one of the persons that shot you. Do you know who
was with him, who else was involved?

MR MOTSAU: I heard him saying this is Switch, because my football name is
Switch, because I was popular with that name when I was playing football.

ADV POTGIETER: Was he with other policemen when he shot you?

MR MOTSAU: I saw, it seems there were two people in the yard, but there
were not many people.

ADV POTGIETER: And you were shot twice. Is that correct?

MR MOTSAU: I was shot twice, Sir, on the spinal chord and then just under
my arm-pit and then I could even feel it on my chest. The doctor's report
says it is still where it was.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	MR MOTSAU

ADV POTGIETER: Were you shot from behind?

MR MOTSAU: Yes, Sir.

ADV POTGIETER: I see that you did institute a claim against the State, is
it against Matshaba or against the Minister of Safety and Security, or
Law and Order, as he was called at that stage.

MR MOTSAU: I was claiming against Matshaba, Sir, because that is the one
I saw shooting me.

ADV POTGIETER: And you say you don't know what happened to that claim,
although you saw an attorney.

MR MOTSAU: Up to now I don't know what is happening about that case.

ADV POTGIETER: Haven't you heard from this attorney?

MR MOTSAU: Can you repeat the question, Sir?

ADV POTGIETER: When last have you had contact with the attorney that was
doing the claim for you, when last did you hear from that person?

MR MOTSAU: I last saw him in court in 1987, Sir, on the 14th of January.
Thereafter, when I came back from prison, I went to South African Council
of Churches. Then they said it doesn't help because they cannot help me
and then the days have expired.

ADV POTGIETER: Just to get clarity on that issue. Before you were charged
criminally yourself, you went to see an attorney, is that correct, to
institute a claim for you against Matshaba?

MR MOTSAU: I made a civil claim first, whilst I was still in the hospital
I made a case. When they realised that I am discharged and I am working,
then they heard that I made a civil claim. Then they made a case against
me, long before I made my own case. The magistrate said to them he heard

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	MR MOTSAU

that, he knows that I have made a civil claim, but he has convicted me
for two years, then the civil case will see it thereafter.

ADV POTGIETER: For what charge did he convict you and sentence you to two
years?

MR MOTSAU: They were saying I was the leader of the comrades on that day
and that I was leading the 500 people, five metres away from leading a
group of 500 people.

ADV POTGIETER: Is that all that they told you?

MR MOTSAU: That is the thing which has made them to arrest and convict me
for two years.

ADV POTGIETER: I just want to try and finally clarify this issue of your
claim. If the Commission wants to find out what has happened to the civil
claim of yours, where should we go to, who should we contact?

MR MOTSAU: My home address is the one which I have written on my written
statement, I am still staying in Kanana at the above-mentioned address. I
am not a person who goes a distance away from home.

ADV POTGIETER: If we want to find out from the person or persons who were
handling your claim, what has happened, who should we go to, who should
we contact? Is it a firm of attorneys or who is it?

MR MOTSAU: This Cyril Silent, since I came back from court, I don't know
where he is. Even up to now I don't know where he is staying and I even
gave up because I was wasting my money looking for him.

ADV POTGIETER: I think we can follow that up. I just want to also just
round off the shooting incident itself. Before you were shot, were you
given any warnings or did this Matshaba say anything to you?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	MR MOTSAU

MR MOTSAU: He didn't give me a warning and we were not, I was not cross
with him or him with me.

ADV POTGIETER: After you were shot, you actually fell down, I believe.
You couldn't move any further. Is that correct?

MR MOTSAU: When I was shot I was not able to wake up until my brother
came to pick me up, to take me to the taxi.

ADV POTGIETER: There was no attempt to arrest you there on the scene,
Matshaba didn't come and try to arrest you after you fell down and you
were lying in the street.

MR MOTSAU: He was not trying to arrest me, but he was threatening my
brother. When my brother came to pick me up he said he must leave me
there otherwise he will shoot me.

ADV POTGIETER: Just finally, Mr Motsau, are you still receiving any
medical attention, any medical treatment, presently?

MR MOTSAU: I am going to the government doctor at Kanane and at other
times I go to Sebong Hospital.

ADV POTGIETER: You have been receiving medical attention from 1986, from
the time when you were shot, right up to the present?

MR MOTSAU: After I was injured, I was a cripple and I was living under
the medical attention all the time.

ADV POTGIETER: Than kyou, Mr Motsau. I will hand you back to the
Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you, Mr Motsau.

DR RANDERA: Mr Motsau, I have got two questions. You say that when you
were charged and sentenced they accused you of being a leader of the
comrades. Were you in fact a leader of the comrades, were you involved in
any political organisation, did you hold any position in Kanane township
at the time?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	MR MOTSAU

MR MOTSAU: I was nothing in politics, and I was working. It was a
Satuday, I came back from work. When I came back from the hospital in
1989, I said it is better that I join the ANC.

DR RANDERA: Where did you work at the time?

MR MOTSAU: I was working at Cash & Carry as a caddy.

DR RANDERA: I just want to understand again this sentencing that took
place. How long after the shooting was the court case?

MR MOTSAU: They took me in April, I was shot in April and then in
January, on the 14th, 1987, I was convicted in court.

DR RANDERA: Let me understand again, how did you manage as someone who
was disabled and paralysed, both your legs are paralysed, in prison for
that time? Were there any special services provided for you as a disabled
person?

MR MOTSAU: There was no special attention in prison. I was just like one
of the other prisoners and they were even saying if I don't work or if I
don't clean, they are not going to give me food. Then I said to them I
will tell my relatives to bring me food or I will go and tell my lawyer
about the situation.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Prof Meiring?

PROF MEIRING: Mr Motsau, only two short questions. I thought I heard you
say that you do not have a wheelchair of your own. You couldn't afford
that. Is that true, is the wheelchair you are using not your own, do you
still need one?

MR MOTSAU: This wheelchair is broken. Since I bought in 1989 it is six
years that I have been using it. It is now

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	MR MOTSAU

broken. I don't have money to buy another one. My subsistence allowance
is too little.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you for that. And the last question, you said that
you are still strong, your hands are strong. Are you able to work, even
though you are a disabled person, are you able to do something for your
own upkeep?

MR MOTSAU: With my hands I can work, but I should not sit down for a long
time, I have got to stretch my legs all the time, because if I sit like
this for a long time, my legs become swollen and I have a pain on my hip.

PROF MEIRING: (Speaker's mike not on) ... for you, what are you doing
with your hands?

MR MOTSAU: I am doing nothing, Sir, in the meantime.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you. We sympathise with you with your problems. We
are saying if a person has been crippled and not doing anything, it is a
lie. Many people used to say I was not doing anything.

MR MOTSAU: Then somebody just pointed at me with a gun and when I turned
then he shot me. They didn't agree that that is the truth.

CHAIRPERSON: Then again, you are crippled and you go to prison again for
22 months.

MS SOOKA: It is unbelievable.

CHAIRPERSON: Then they it seems it is not the truth what you are saying.
What can we say? We are here to see the truth about all what happened
during those dark days. So that we should be able to work together to
help each other in a country. So that these kind of things should never
happen again. Even the victims, the nation should be able to say this is
something we give you, that we sympathise

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	12	MR MOTSAU

with you. There is not much we can do. Even now when we hear you saying
about the wheelchair. Maybe if there will be somebody who would say we
will try to help you so that you should get a new wheelchair which is
better than the one you have. We will just hope and we will try to help
you all, that God should be the one who should be your Protector. Then to
give you the holy ointment in your broken heart, in the broken spirits.
We thank you.





	-------------









































KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

