	1	G M MPHOTSHA


	1	G M MPHOTSHA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: GEORGE M MPHOTSHA

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Mr Mphotsha welcome. Is the lady with you Your wife?

MR MPHOTSHA: Yes, it is my wife.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much. Welcome. Mr Mphotsha you are going to
tell us about what happened to your son, Isaac Mphotsha. And this
happened on the 29th October 1977.

MR MPHOTSHA: This happened in October 1977.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mphotsha as we have heard about so many stories, you have
also come to tell us of the shooting to death of your son. Before I hand
over to Mr Wynand Malan, who will be leading you, will you please stand
and take the oath.

GEORGE MPHOTSHA: (sworn states)

MR MALAN: Good afternoon, Mr Mphotsha. Thank you for joining us. Again,
we have your statement. There would, probably if you do not extend to
your own accord, be a few questions we want to ask you. I would like you
to tell us in your own words the story that you have already given to us
in writing. If you will please proceed.

MR MPHOTSHA: In 1977 this thing happened in Sheila, in a house in Sheila.
My son was working at Uncle Alpha on a contract basis there at MG. He
finished off work that day

and his colleagues were with him. And he left the base



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	G M MPHOTSHA

and went home.

	When he came home, on the grass, he was sitting reading a book. He and
his sister were sitting and relaxing there. While they were doing that
the police came round about sunset, at about seven. They were at Twolo's.
And we were wondering what the police wanted.

	We then again saw the police coming down the road to my place. In the
meantime I was lying down, I wasn't feeling too well. They came in by the
door and when they were there they came in. My son was stuttering, he
couldn't speak very well and the two policemen came, the one had a
revolver and the other had a gun. Because my son stuttered, they said,
come here, come here. And he was afraid and he came into the house.

	When he came into the house, the one said, give us your pass and he
didn't want to. He was pushed by the window and he went to stand outside.

	People came around because they had seen these two policemen. And wanted
to know what is happening. And they said, we are shooting. That is what
happened. While that was happening, I called my son. He was standing
outside and I called him and he didn't want to come inside. And that was
what happened.

	A little while later, while we were still sitting at home we heard a
shot outside, two shots. They shot him. After that a policeman came, a
black policeman, and when he came he said, hey Johannes, come here, come
here.

And they said to him, close that door. He closed the door.

	They had finished with him. When I was opening the door this policeman,
by the name of Johannes said to me,



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST

	3	G M MPHOTSHA

who are these people? You leave the door, don't open it.

	Thereafter another policeman came in a red car, registration number CBM
Mafikeng, by that time. They were saying this but they had already
finished off my child and we were inside the house.

	They loaded him into the boot of the car and left with him. We heard
from people who were sitting outside, that it was a Mafikeng car. And
they let us out of the house.

	When they let us out we came out and found a lot of people outside. I
asked, why was the child killed? No, we don't know. We then went out,
myself, my brother in law. We went to Twisong Hospital.

	When we got there we went to the mortuary, thinking that he was there,
but he was not there. And asked at the workers at Twisong, but he was not
there. There were no policemen there.

	After some days, the following day, on the 21st - few days later on the
21st - or the following day on the 21st, I wasn't there, they went and
harassed my wife and said to here, informed her that we injured Isaac,
but they said that, knowing that they had hidden my son. Those were three
policemen that arrived at my house in my absence.

	The following day, the third day, the car with the Mafikeng
registration... We went to the jail, but were told that he wasn't there.
Somebody said that he was there and we gave them a bag of oranges, saying
that if he was ok, give him the oranges to eat. We left.

	We started at Victoria Hospital and couldn't find him there. And we were
giving up by then. We left and on the way, in Mefikeng we got two
policemen who said to us that



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	4	G M MPHOTSHA

this person is in Lichtenburg, he has been shot. And we left.

CHAIRPERSON: Have you more to tell us?

MR MPHOTSHA: I went to Dithaba the following week. I got to the mortuary
in Lichtenburg and found the policeman, white man. My child had been
shot. They had shot him on the one side and the bullets had come out on
his right. The bullet had pierced him.

	I asked them how are we going to bury this child, but this white
policeman said that he didn't care. This wasn't the Transkei, even if we
buried him in a cardboard box, it didn't matter.

	The days went on. The fourth week after my child was there, Ishmael
Botha, a doctor, sent somebody to me to ask me to come and see him. This
was Ishmael Botha, an Indian. I went to him and said to him I will speak
to the police. You'll wait.

	I'm going to send you to Johannesburg to Dlamini in Commissioner Street.
You must go there. I was with Mr Tholo who has narrowly missed being
shot. And we went to give our statements and we then came back.

	The days passed on. And I thought, my child must come back, because this
policeman said that we can even bury him in a cardboard box. We took him
and he was taken to Itusing and was there for a period of one month and
that is when we finally laid him to rest. We finally buried him.

	Botha was always communicating with me, saying that we could speak to
the police and I said how come, because we have already buried him. My
child was working, there he has been shot without having done anything.
And nobody knows



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	5	G M MPHOTSHA

anything. The policemen don't know anything. You were just wasting time.

	He took me to Camey Barbroff. He also delayed me and Ishmael Botha took
me again to Johannesburg.

	Botha was the one who was dealing with the police. 	From then on I have
never been healthy again until now.

	That is all.

MR MALAN: Thank you very much, Mr Mphotsha. I think one of the
difficulties that we will have is that the Act keeps us within a certain
framework which we as Truth Commission need to listen to stories and to
make our findings. That specifically relates to the political framework
and the political motive. We have no such information. 		

	Can you tell us a little more about your son's activities at the time.
How old was he? Was he politically involved? Is there anything that you
can tell us that can shed more light on the framework within which this
happened.

MR MPHOTSHA: No, he was someone that was coming from work and reading his
papers peacefully. And he was only 22 years old, sitting reading his
books. Now that my child has been shot. But the police were looking for
Tholo. I don't know what Mphotsha had to do with that. That was my
child's first job at MG Contracts. And that is it. He was fresh out of
school.

MR MALAN: Have you knowledge of any involvement of your son in any
political organization or environment? Was he non-politically and totally
so?

MR MPHOTSHA: I cannot say, he used to read his books and I wasn't very
healthy. I was very sickly.

MR MALAN: At the time what was the address where this happened?

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	6	G M MPHOTSHA

MR MPHOTSHA: Our address back then was 488, Sheila.

MR MALAN: Thank you very much. I have no further questions at this stage.

MS SEROKE: I would like to know when you say that you do not know whether
your child was politically active when the police arrived and they were
looking for Tolo.

	Do you think that perhaps they came into your house by mistake, maybe
they intended to go to Tolo's?

MR MPHOTSHA: The name that they mentioned was that they were looking for
Tolo, not Mphotsha.

MS SEROKE: According to you, did you know who Tolo was, that it was your
neighbour maybe.

MR MPHOTSHA: He used to stay a few houses behind me.

MS SEROKE: Your son, he used to stutter. He couldn't even tell them. He
got such a fright and he jumped out of the window. And he was standing in
the yard. But did you show them your son's passport?

MR MPHOTSHA: They came to fetch it on the 22nd from my wife when I wasn't
there. And she told me, because she was the one who was left there.

MS SEROKE: In the car that you people were watching through the window,
how he was being put in the car's boot, did you see how the shot him, or
did you just heard the shot.

MR MPHOTSHA: We just heard two shots.

MS SEROKE: In the time that you were going to the mortuary to go and look
for your son's corpse, where you even saw the spot where he was shot, did
you see any damage to his hand or something? Since they said they had
shot his hand?

MR MPHOTSHA: I didn't see any damage as such. They shot



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	7	G M MPHOTSHA

him on his left and the bullet came through on his right.

MS SEROKE: Thank you very much.

MR MALAN: Mr Mphotsha, I have just one follow-up question. The two
policemen who entered your house, that first time, were they dressed in
uniform or in private clothes?

MR MPHOTSHA: They were privately dressed, not in uniform.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mphotsha I understand how painful this if for you and your
wife to recall this story, but I would like to ask one question. This
person that had been referred to Tolo, do you know whether he was
involved in any political activity?

MR MPHOTSHA: I do not know whether he was politically active, because
this Tolo was a priest. Even now, he has passed away, he is survived by
his children.

MS SEROKE: You say in your statements that you even went to Pretoria,
trying to see the Minister of Police. Did they allow you to see him? If
you did, what did he say to you or what did you say to him? What
transpired?

MS SEROKE: Would you like me to repeat the question? I was asking in the
time that you mentioned in your statement that you went to Pretoria to
see the Minister of Police, what transpired? Were you allowed to see him
and if you did what transpired?

MR MPHOTSHA: Not in Pretoria, in Lichtenburg.

They revealed him a bit, so that I could just see him a

bit.

MS SEROKE: The mortuary in Lichtenburg ...

MR MANTHATA: We have a little bit of problem with regard where to place
the case, but we are sad for any loss of life and we can understand how
sad your family is over a child - whose purpose of death cannot be
established, can be MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	8	G M MPHOTSHA

established but the perpetrator cannot be traced, nor could the courts
have taken your case.

	We will see what to do, that is to refer to some of those bodies to help
pursue the case. If at this time, it is still possible. We are very
sorry, sad and we wish to convey this to you and your family.

	We thank you for the patience you took to be with us today. Thank you so
much.

	-----------------------------

