	1	S B MSIZA


	1	S B MSIZA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	14.08.1996	NAME:	SIMON BOYIZELI MSIZA

CASE:	JB00788	-	PRETORIA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much. Please be seated.

MR MSIZA: Thank you.

DR BORAINE: Now before I hand you over to Mr Ally, you can hear my voice
clearly?

MR MSIZA: Yes.

DR BORAINE: Excellent. Mr Ally.

DR ALLY: Good day to you Sir. You are also coming to speak about what
happened on that day, the march, 21st of November 1985. Both you and your
wife were part of that march and your wife was killed. Do you want to
tell us what happened on that day?

MR MSIZA: On the 21st in 1985, the 21st of November, there was a
stay-away action in Mamelodi in connection with the rent issue. All
Mamelodi's people had not gone to work because we wanted to discuss the
rent issue, but all the residents decided that we were going to the
office. Before people even got there more than 1000 police, there were
more than 1000 police. We got there and we gathered and I could see that
there were many policemen and I moved a bit. I told them that there were
many policemen and there were many people as well. Before the memorandum
could even be handed over we heard helicopters overhead. The Mayor, Mr
Ndlazi, said that he gives us five minutes. Before a minute had even
expired they started firing teargas at us and we started PRETORIA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	S B MSIZA

running away. My wife was also part of the crowd. They did not shoot her
at the hall, they shot her approximately one and a quarter kilometres
away. The Hippos moved around the place like rabbits. They shot her
behind the stadium.

	Thereafter we tried to bury them, we tried to bury them and we buried
them in December, on the third of December. When we buried them, after we
buried them, approximately 1985 and 1986 a trial, the trial started in
1987 at Pretoria North Magistrate's Court. The trial continued for four
years, 1987, 1988, 1989 and 1990. August the trial was finalised. When
the trial was finalised in August we were told that the case is being
referred to the Supreme Court. We did not receive any response from the
Supreme Court or any message telling us what was happening with the case.
We did not receive any message telling us to come to court because the
Attorney-General is supposed to inform us to go to the Supreme Court, but
we did not go.

	In 1992 I consulted Mr Matlala, the attorney, wanting to know, because
we have waited for such a long time, what is happening with the case. Are
we not going to the Supreme Court and Matlala said that the
Attorney-General has not responded yet. I said, after such a long time
and he said, no, he has not responded yet. Be that as it may, we received
papers from Attorney Mohabe saying that we should come and get R1 384,00.
I went to Mohabe's office and wanted to know what was the R1 384,00 for
and he said that it was funeral expenses. I said, I did not apply for
funeral expenses, I wanted to know what killed my wife and what happened.
Why did she have to die, why did they shoot her, what did she do? Did she
steal or what has she done? I did not see Mr Mohabe sending any of his
assistants to

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	S B MSIZA

come and tell me that he knows, sent his assistants to come and give me
this cheque. He did not call me in to speak to me. I took this cheque and
sent my child to go and pay his school fees at Soshanguve because the, my
partner who was helping me in life they had killed and because I owed
school fees. Tell the police to come back and shoot me as well.

	Thereafter, after the court case the policemen kept on coming to my
house saying that they wanted ANC documents, accusing me of being an ANC
member and saying that they were looking for ANC documents. They
ransacked my house. My and they searched the house and then I said that
we were not going to starve to death. Then, hence I want to ask the Truth
Commission because I want to know about the R1 384,00 that they
considered to have been the funeral expenses. Can you bury somebody on
that amount of money? I just cannot get to the word now. I want them to
investigate as well as the State is concerned that the State issued,
whether the State issued R1 384,00 for the, to compensate me for the
death of my wife because I have suffered for years with small children as
a single parent. They broke my diningroom furniture and broke down my
doors and they hit my child looking for these ANC documents in my house.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

DR ALLY: Thank you Sir. If I could just ask you one or two questions.
This march was, the protest action was organised by the Mamelodi Civic
Association.

MR MSIZA: Thank you.

DR ALLY: Were you or your wife or both of you involved in the executive
of the Mamelodi Civic Association? What was your relationship.

MR MSIZA: No, no.

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	S B MSIZA

DR ALLY: You were just ordinary members?

MR MSIZA: No.

DR ALLY: Not even members?

MR MSIZA: No.

DR ALLY: You responded to the call to go and march.

MR MSIZA: Thank you.

DR ALLY: And on the day of the march you said there was a stay-away. Now
was this stay-away, was it widely supported or were some people, did some
people want to go to work that day and they were prevented from going to
work? Can you just tell us a little bit about the stay-away and how it
was organised and how people responded to it?

MR MSIZA: The march was a matter of force. Everybody must go there.

DR ALLY: Were people ...

MR MSIZA: Everybody was forced to participate in this march because
everyone was paying rent and the rent was far too high.

DR ALLY: Now you say that the police were there from early already. So
the police must have been aware that something was going to happen on
that day because you say that there were a fleet of police cars. You
mention over 1000 police already from the early morning. So they must
have been aware that something was, so this was something that was
planned a bit in advance or did it, how long did it take to plan this,
this march?

MR MSIZA: The march of the 21st? It was planned because it was planned by
the Civic.

DR ALLY: Now you say that, and I am reading from your statement. You say
I also took part in the march, but I surrendered when I realised there
was a fleet of police

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	S B MSIZA

vans. In other words you broke away from the march. Now why did you do
that? Did you sense that something was going to go wrong or was there
something in the, something that gave you a feeling that maybe there was
going to be violence, that you broke away from the march?

MR MSIZA: Thank you. I could see that Pharaoh's army had arrived and they
were well armed, all of them. That is what made me say that, hey guys,
let us leave here because I can see that something is going to happen
here because Pharaoh and his men have arrived, Herod and his men have
arrived, let us run.

DR ALLY: And did other people also leave with you? Did other people feel
the same way or did they continue with the march?

MR MSIZA: They did not continue because just when they got there, before
they could even hand over the memorandum to the Superintendent, they
started shooting at us.

DR ALLY: Now, the previous witness and you also mention the name of
Bernard Ndlazi, the then Mayor of Mamelodi. What was the relationship of
the community to this Mayor before the actual march? Was there any other
confrontation before this march with this Mayor?

MR MSIZA: No.

DR ALLY: How did the community feel about him? Was his house ever
attacked or was he ever told that he must not be the Mayor? What was the
feeling of the community towards him?

MR MSIZA: They did not want him anymore because the rent was far too high
and we could not afford it anymore.

DR ALLY: And this Mayor, where is he now? Bernard Ndlazi, is he still in
the community? Is he still in Mamelodi?

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	S B MSIZA

MR MSIZA: Yes, he is still in Mamelodi.

DR ALLY: Thank you very much Sir. No more questions.

MR MSIZA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Any further questions? Tom Manthata.

MR MANTHATA: Has Bernard ever apologised to the community of Mamelodi
after that incident?

MR MSIZA: No.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Any other. Wynand Malan.

MR MALAN: You say that it was compulsory to participate in the march. Is
that correct? You were forced to do it. What would have happened if you
had not gone. What would have happened if you did not go, if people would
have stayed away?

MR MSIZA: Nobody knows.

MR MALAN: You also, well we will ask everybody. Maybe we can find out
from some who could know. Could I ask you a follow-up question to this.

CHAIRPERSON: Order please.

MR MALAN: You say you withdrew from the march, you surrendered as you say
in your statement before it got to the Municipal offices, I assume. Did
you go back to your home?

MR MSIZA: No, I did not go back home because after I went and I found out
that my wife had been shot I did not stay there, I went to there. I went
there and I found that she had been shot thrice in her back.

MR MALAN: I am not sure, in your statement you say that the march was on,
your wife was a participant. You say you saw the police and the fleet of
police cars and you say then you PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	S B MSIZA

surrendered. Can you just explain that?

MR MSIZA: When they started shooting I had already run.

MR MALAN: So you only left when the shooting started? Is that so? Did you
only leave when the shooting started?

MR MSIZA: I ran away when they started shooting. We ran up the mountain
because the police and ...

MR MALAN: Thank you very much.

MR MSIZA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Even if we laugh we know that we are laughing because we do
not want to cry and when you also tell the story you tell it with a bit
of humour such as you ran and they started shooting and hitting, but we
do not laugh because we are laughing at you, we are laughing with you
because our hears are also sore because of what you are telling us. You
are telling us something very painful. Telling us that your wife had
already died, she had been shot in her back and you raised your child on
your own. It is difficult to console a person yet we must try and say
that one should try and hang in there no matter how hard it may be. Even
though it is difficult we know that things will get better in time and
that she paid the price for our liberation which we are enjoying today.
We know that today we have, we are reaping the fruits of what we sowed
back then and we hear what you are saying when you say that it took you
many years, it was years before there was even a trial and that nothing
became of that case.

	We will try and investigate to establish what happened and also find out
about this amount of R1 384,00, try and establish what this money was
for, why they said they were giving you this money. If they said that it
was funeral expenses, somebody that had been buried back then should now
PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	S B MSIZA

be such, this pittance should compensate for the life of somebody or
alternatively if there was more money that was compensated and if
somebody else maybe took some of the money. We will investigate all those
possibilities, but we thank you for having come, to come and share your
pain with us.

MR MSIZA: Thank you very much Archbishop.

	------------------------------















































PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

