	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	DEBORAH NOMEISIE MZATI		

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 1



REVD FINCA:	We welcome you Mrs Deborah Mzati. Reverend Xundu will help
you to take an oath and he will also lead you with questions on behalf of
the Commission.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

DEBORAH NOMEISIE MZATI:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Let me now continue Mr Chairperson, to lead her
with questions. What is your clan name, Ma'am?

MRS MZATI:	I am from the Tswagat clan.

REVD XUNDU:	Please tell us about son's story, Ayanda so that we can ask
you a few questions.

MRS MZATI:	My son Ayanda left home in 1985 in December in Jansenville. He
went to Port Elizabeth. When I went to Port Elizabeth to fetch him, I was
told that they went into exile, they crossed the country. I didn't see
him since then. I last saw my son in 1985 at home in December.

	He left in 1986 at home. In 1995, I used to come at home and I he was
not there, it was the time of the struggle. He used to return home at
night. Sometimes I would see him, sometimes I wouldn't see him.

	Until he left Jansenville and he went to Port Elizabeth. I went to Port
Elizabeth looking for him, but I couldn't find him, because I was told
that he crossed the country.

REVD XUNDU:	Was it December 1985?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	DN MZATI

MRS MZATI:	Yes, it was December 1985. I think on the 2nd of December 1985.

REVD XUNDU:	Didn't you get any information from the comrades and his
friends?

MRS MZATI:	Some of them came back and they told me that he could be in
Cuba, other said that he could be in Angola.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you make any investigations to try to find out where he
is?

MRS MZATI:	We started last year to try and find his whereabouts.

REVD XUNDU:	What does the record say about his disappearance?

MRS MZATI:	In Port Elizabeth they told us they would inform us where he
was.

REVD XUNDU:	How old was he at that time?

MRS MZATI:	He left in 1996.

REVD XUNDU:	How old was he?

MRS MZATI:	He was born in 1965.

REVD XUNDU:	Was he born in 1965?

MRS MZATI:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Meaning he was about 20 something? Was he at school or was he
working? He used to have some piece jobs?

MRS MZATI:	Yes, he used to have some piece jobs.

REVD XUNDU:	But he used to give you money at home?

MRS MZATI:	Yes, he gave me money.

REVD XUNDU:	Did he have a girlfriend in the community or did he stay with
a girl?

MRS MZATI:	No, because he was still young, he was still staying with me
at home.

REVD XUNDU:	Did he have any children?

MRS MZATI:	I heard that he had a child in Port

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	DN MZATI

Elizabeth, but up until now, I didn't see the child. I told these people
that I wanted to see my son's child, but they didn't bring the child to
me.

REVD XUNDU:	You said that this thing affected your health?

MRS MZATI;	Yes, it affected me because I contracted heart disease. I am
sick, I receive an old age pension.

	We were suffering at that time, because people used to come and kick the
doors and the windows, because when I came back from work, they would ask
me where my son is.

REVD XUNDU:	What would you like the Commission to do for you Ma'am in
your situation?

MRS MZATI:	I want to know where my son is. Even if he passed away, I want
to know where his bones are.

REVD XUNDU:	Is that all you wanted to say Ma'am?

MRS MZATI:	If I could know where my son is, I would be very glad. I want
to know if he died, or if he is still alive because I remember him, I
miss him now. He is always in my mind.

REVD XUNDU:	In your statement you said that you would like to receive old
age pension.

MRS MZATI:	I do get old age pension now.

REVD XUNDU:	Mr Chairman I think that is all I wanted to ask. Maybe you
have something more to add.

REVD FINCA:	June Crichton?

MS CRICHTON:	Mrs Mzati, I have two questions for you. The first one, in
the statement I have in front of me it says that one of the returned
exiles that came from Cuba was a man by the name of Caswura Zutili, is
that correct?

MRS MZATI;	Yes, that is correct.

MS CRICHTON:	And then further on in the statement, there

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	DN MZATI

are words here that I'd like to have you explain to me. It says here
shortly after talks about the UDF campaigning for recruitment of members
and the fact that your son disappeared, it says in the statement - the
State machinery came down hard and attempted to stamp out the UDF from
existence. Will you please just explain that a little bit more to me,
what was the State machinery doing?

MRS MZATI:	At that time it was very difficult. We couldn't even go
forward or proceed with any activities.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you Mrs Mzati, I hand you back to the Chairman.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Sandi?

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairman. Mrs Mzati, these people who said they
saw your child in Cuba, others said in Angola, can you help this
Commission by identifying their names?

MRS MZATI:	I know Caswura Zutili.

MR SANDI:	Who else was there?

MRS MZATI:	The other one is Pha Matshaka.

MR SANDI:	Are they around Cradock?

MRS MZATI:	No, they stay in Jansenville.

MR SANDI:	When we go back a little bit, you said that you request
assistance concerning your medical treatments.

MRS MZATI:	Yes, sir.

MR SANDI:	Do you have any other requests you made, maybe you forgot to
tell us now?

MRS MZATI:	I requested about my health because I do visit doctors in Port
Elizabeth to get medical treatment.

MR SANDI:	Didn't you ask any other request?

MRS MZATI:	Except the bones of my child. I want to know where he is.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Ma'am, thank you Mr Chairman.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	DN MZATI

REVD FINCA:	Mrs Mzati, do you have any doubt in your mind or did you hear
any rumours about what happened to your son, maybe you would like to
share that with us.

MRS MZATI:	No, I did not hear any rumours about my son, but one person
said that he is still alive and the other one sent me his photograph, but
I don't think he is still alive.

	I would believe that, if he can maybe write a letter to me and tell me
where he is.

REVD FINCA:	Mrs Deborah Mzati, we thank you very much. We know that this
thing is very painful to you as you are here in front of this Commission
today.

	And we know that there are other parents who came forward to this
Commission to tell us about their children who disappeared or who went
into exile to fight for liberation.

	Now that they see others coming back, they see other children coming
back home, and others are working, others are in the Government, but
theirs have not come back yet.

	And there is no one who can tell them where they are, whether they are
still alive or not, or what happened to them. Did they die in exile or
what? Those are the questions that parents have about their children.

	I can say that we thank you for bringing this issue to this Commission
because now we are trying to talk with organisations such as ANC and
other organisations, because we think that they have to give answers that
could satisfy the parents of these children.

	Of what happened to these children, whether they were injured or if they
died in other countries. If we can find their bones, the Commission will
try to bring them to their parents so that they can be buried.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	

	If any other thing happened so that we can hold ceremonies to remember
them, we thank you for coming here today.

	We would look at this issue as the Commission and we will try to bring
an answer to you before our time ends as the Commission. Thank you.

	--------------------

