
	1	X MZINZI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: XOLANI MAXIM MZINZI

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We are at this point in time, going to ask Xolani Maxin
Mzinzi to come closer and to be lead by Ms Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela.

XOLANI MAXIM MZINZI: (sworn states)

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Thank you, I greet you Xolani and you are also
going to give some explanation connected to this incident which is a full
picture of what happened in Langa in Cape Town in Sharpeville and even
here in Uitenhage. We therefore welcome you before this Commission. Just
before you say anything, I would like to highlight something that you
have written here on your statement that the questions we had about the
banning order you have referred that when you got to the square you had
got some pamphlets that were explaining about the second banning order
which stated that the funeral that was supposed to be conducted on that
Thursday had been banned. Now could you explain to us what these
pamphlets looked like, and who were the writers?

MR MZINZI: Yes I picked it up. It was just a paper and there was no name
written of the writer. It was just something, no address.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	X MZINZI

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Was there no letterhead to show that it came from
the government?

MR MZINZI: No, it had nothing that indicated that it was from the South
African Defence Force.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Here you explained how you got shot, now could you
tell us further when you got shot?

MR MZINZI: I was shot at the same time with the other people. We were
just approaching section 16. I was in the third row in that procession
and what actually happened I saw Kwanele at the time he was falling and
then when I was turning to run away I also saw myself falling down.
Whilst I was lying down there on my face, I was lifted up by a policeman
that was speaking Zulu and he pointed a gun at me asking whether I wanted
him to shoot me dead. Then I did not answer back. Fortunately an
ambulance came and took me to hospital.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: So this policeman that spoke Zulu was it one of
those that were called the Amma Chaka, named after the King of the Zulu's
Chaka?

MR MZINZI: Yes, I think so.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Then, when they took you to Livingstone hospital
and you were discharged, you were taken to jail.

MR MZINZI: Yes, it is like that.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: For how long were you in jail?

MR MZINZI: I was in jail for 4 days.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: What was the reason they gave for locking you up?

MR MZINZI: They said they were arresting me for public violence.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Was it in connection with the stones

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	X MZINZI

that they had placed on the peoples hands at the time you were in pain?

MR MZINZI: Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: So, as they were shooting you they wanted to give
an impression that you are the people who caused the trouble?

MR MZINZI: Yes.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Now, what are your requests to this Commission?

MR MZINZI: My request is that ever since I got injured, I became an
epileptic. Just once in three months and when it happens it seems like a
stroke because after 3 days, after the attack, I wont be able to eat, I
wont be able to do anything. Then this is an indication that I cannot be
employed. The doctor said that I was nervous, and I could not go on with
my education, so I went as far as Matric. I can not go on with my
education, so I am asking this Commission to consider this problem of
mine because there is no place were I can be employed. I have tried to
get work for myself, but I am unemployable.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: By the way, where were you hit?

MR MZINZI: I was hit by the bullet at the back of my head.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Did they take it out?

MR MZINZI: No, it just hit me and chipped, so it did not get into my head.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: But it caused you to get into hospital and you were
semi-conscious?

MR MZINZI: Yes, I was.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Is there any other information or any other
requests you have?

MR MZINZI: Yes, I am asking that there should be a centre

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	X MZINZI

that should be erected because some of us could not further our education
and we cannot be employed, so if we could have a centre where they are
going to teach us some hand work so as to have some skill, we would be
grateful. Thank you.

MS GOBODO-MADIKIZELA: Thank you Mr Mzinzi.



--------------------





