
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	08 APRIL 1997

NAME: 	MPHIWISI DAVID "SIGCAWU" NAZO

CASE:		EC1223/96ALB	-	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 2

____________________________________________________________

REV XUNDU: Mphiwisi David "Sigcawu" Nazo, please stand up.

MPHIWISI DAVID "SIGCAWU" NAZO: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you. Mr Chairperson, he has been properly sworn in.

CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you, Mr Nazo. We will hand over to Tiny Maya to
lead you with questions on behalf of the Commission.

MS MAYA: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Nazo, in your statement here you
are going to tell us about yourself, about two incidents from 1976 up
until 1986 or 1976 and 1983. Please explain to us what was happening at
that time. Were you a member of any organisation?

MR NAZO: Yes, I was a member of COSAS. I was doing standard six at the
time.

MS MAYA: What year was this? Is it 1976?

MR NAZO: Yes, it was 1976.

MS MAYA: What happened in 1976?

MR NAZO: In 1976 we were protesting against the use of Afrikaans as a
medium of expression in schools. We wanted English to be used. We took
steps as students. We burnt down Afrikaans books. After the police were
called to our school. They then took us to the police station. They beat
us, they assaulted us. They would put a sack, a wet sack in our faces and
tie this sack. All this time they would beat us.

MS MAYA: For how long did you stay in prison?

MR NAZO: I stayed for a week. We were then released after that week.
After three weeks a school was burnt. We were then detained again,
because the police wanted us to tell them who burnt down the school. At
that time there was one white police, Kraus and Jibilikile Khani, they
would take us to the garage and beat us with the fishing rods. All the
time we were doing push-ups and they would beat us with these fishing
rods.

MS MAYA: Where was this garage?

MR NAZO: It was in the police station.

MS MAYA: You said that you were doing standard six, how old were you?

MR NAZO: I was about 15 or 16 years old.

MS MAYA: What was the name of the school you attended?

MR NAZO: It was Cannon Higher Primary School.

MS MAYA: When you were taken back to the cells, for how long did you stay
there?

MR NAZO: I stayed for a month, but one Sunday when the Boers were beating
us certain people cried. We were then released on Monday.

MS MAYA: Did you appear before the Magistrate?

MR NAZO: No, I appeared before the Magistrate when I was arrested for
public violence when I was coming from St Albans.

MS MAYA: What year was this?

MR NAZO: It was in 1983. I was arrested all the time. My home was a
prison. I did not have time to stay at home and to enjoy life with my
family. As I result of this I am confused, I do not remember, clearly,
the dates. I would be released this morning at 11, they will come again
and arrest me at three.

MS MAYA: From 1976?

MR NAZO: Yes, from 1976. I was then arrested under the State of
Emergency. They took me to Kennispos where I was assaulted the whole day.
They would give me porridge all the time. They then transferred me to
Peterson in an old cell that has weeds in it. They then transferred me to
St Albans. We were tortured there. There, Mr Sandi was there, we were
together in that prison. In St Albans it was a very terrible situation.
They then transferred me to Kirkwood. Then it was better in Kirkwood.
When I was supposed to be released they said I was charged with public
violence. They took me to Kenton. That was the 13th month I was in prison
all the time.

	I appeared in court, I was released with a R500,00 bail. They gave me a
date to appear in court. I then hired a lawyer, Mr Sandi. The case
continued for three days. The advocate there was Mr Fourie from
Grahamstown. On the third day the Magistrate argued with the advocate and
after that the Magistrate asked them why they were arresting me. After
that the case was withdrawn.

MS MAYA: As you were arrested as a student, you were doing standard six,
you will be arrested in the morning and in the evening. Did you manage to
continue with your education?

MR NAZO: I went to Ciskei to continue with my education. When I completed
my standard eight my father passed away. I tried to do standard nine.
After passing standard nine my mother passed away, my brothers were
looking after me. I tried to do standard ten. One white man helped me. I
managed to get my standard ten certificate.

MS MAYA: Do you remember the name of this white man?

MR NAZO: It was Mr Terry Marais from Durban.

MS MAYA: Is he still alive?

MR NAZO: Yes, he is.

MS MAYA: We will ask you to give us his details if you can. What is your
state of health?

MR NAZO: In my head I have, my veins are painful in my head. I went to
Port Alfred. They told me that I was suffering from TB, but then they
discovered that I had pneumonia.

MS MAYA: When was it?

MR NAZO: It was in last year.

MS MAYA: Was this a result of cold prison cells?

MR NAZO: Yes.

MS MAYA: Do you have a request to the Commission?

MR NAZO: Yes, I do have a request to the Commission.

MS MAYA: What is your request to the Commission?

MR NAZO: My request is that I would like to further my studies. There is
nobody to support me now. Even at my home, I stay alone together with my
child. My child is four years old. I cannot even afford the money for him
to attend a pre-school.

MS MAYA: You said that you have standard ten certificate, what would you
like to do?

MR NAZO: I would like to go to university if it is possible.

MS MAYA: What career would you like to pursue?

MR NAZO: At this time I cannot tell you, because I tried to go to
technikons, but I could not afford financially.

MS MAYA: Is that all you want to say?

MR NAZO: Yes, that is all.

MS MAYA: Thank you. I will hand over to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Nazo, were there any other people who were with you at
the time you were arrested?

MR NAZO: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: What are their names?

MR NAZO: Norman Thomas, he is staying in Kenton. Sgagele Mbunge, he is
also in Kenton. Others are in Cape Town and others are in Port Elizabeth.

CHAIRPERSON: You said Sgagele Mbunge. These people can be your witnesses
that you were arrested by the people you mentioned in your statement?

MR NAZO: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: When you were in prison were you tortured in any way?

MR NAZO: Yes, I was tortured, Sir. At the time I was in Kennispos they
put this sack and they would take cigarettes and put them out in my body.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you please explain about the sack?

MR NAZO: They would take this sack to water and they would put in my fact
and beat me and assault me. Those were detectives from Grahamstown.

CHAIRPERSON: When did you realise that you were suffering from TB?

MR NAZO: It was in November in 1995. I was just released from prison.

CHAIRPERSON: Was it 1996?

MR NAZO: No, it was 1995.

CHAIRPERSON: I cannot count properly, do not howl me. You found out that
you are suffering from TB.

MR NAZO: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you receiving treatment?

MR NAZO: I have just completed my treatment this year. I am staying at
home right now.

CHAIRPERSON: Where did you get your treatment, in which hospital?

MR NAZO: In the Santa Marjorie Hospital in Port Alfred.

CHAIRPERSON: When we want your medical treatment records are we going to
be able to get them there?

MR NAZO: Yes, the statement takers from the Truth Commission, they did go
there and get my records.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mr Nazo. We have noted that the people you
mentioned, those who arrested you, Jibilikile Khani, would like to appear
in front of the Commission to contradict the evidence you have just given
us, but we just found out that he sent his representative, Chris de
Klerk, who will give testimony on his behalf. We thank you for now. We
will ask you to go back to your seat.

	------------------------------

