
	1	N BLAAUW

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: NOFINISH MINAH BLAAUW

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We would like to ask the next witness, Mrs Nofinish Minah
Blaauw, to come forward please.

NOFINISH MINAH BLAAUW: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Let me greet you. I want to thank you for your presence. I
want to confirm your names, are you Nofinish Minah Blaauw, is that
correct?

MS BLAAUW: Yes that is correct.

CHAIRPERSON: For a number of reasons, among them, the reason of time, and
the fact that there are many of you here who also need a chance to talk
here today, I'm going to read what is important, what is in this
statement and you are going to confirm if all this is correct. If there
is somewhere where you think it is not right, maybe some of the things
you forgot to include, you can just add them afterwards but the most
important thing right now for the other witnesses here, is to ensure that
everything in this statement is correct and they must also tell what
happened to them or maybe to their friends or relatives and how the whole
situation affected them. In conclusion they must also state clearly their
requests to the Commission.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	N BLAAUW

Let me start now. Your son by the name of Gladstone Buyile Blaauw was in
that scene on that particular day.

MS BLAAUW: Yes that is correct.

CHAIRPERSON: You heard that he was also shot.

MS BLAAUW: Yes that is also correct.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell us about Buyile's accident, the whole thing,
how the death of Buyile affected you?

MS BLAAUW: I was at home, I was not at the scene. He left in the morning
and he said he was going to the funeral in Gwanubushle.

CHAIRPERSON: I'm talking about the way the whole thing affected you at
home, that such a young boy died in that manner.

MS BLAAUW: It affected us.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you give us details? Especially on that part. Did you
ever go to Jubilee Hotel?

MS BLAAUW: Yes we were called to the Jubilee Hotel.

CHAIRPERSON: Who called you?

MS BLAAUW: I don't know those people.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you please help and tell us what happened in that hotel?

MS BLAAUW: They said they were going to tell us about money.

CHAIRPERSON: Do you mean money?

MS BLAAUW: Yes, money.

CHAIRPERSON: What did they say about money?

MS BLAAUW: They said they were going to give us money.

CHAIRPERSON: Was there any money that you received from the government?

MS BLAAUW: Yes, we received some money, but I don't know how much.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	N BLAAUW

CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell us about your health?

MS BLAAUW: I'm not too well, since the death of Buyile.

CHAIRPERSON: What kind of treatment are you getting from your doctor, Dr
Monumil?

MS BLAAUW: I am suffering from high blood pressure.

CHAIRPERSON: When did the whole thing start? Did this happen after this
accident or before?

MS BLAAUW: It started after Buyile's death. By the way you said who is
this Luvuyu, Luvuyu is his child.

CHAIRPERSON: Where is Luvuyu now?

MS BLAAUW: Luvuyu is at home.

CHAIRPERSON: What is your request by the way containing this Luvuyu?

MS BLAAUW: I wish that Luvuyu can get a grant.

CHAIRPERSON: Where is Luvuyu's mother?

MS BLAAUW: His mother is working in Port Elizabeth.

CHAIRPERSON: Are they communicating?

MS BLAAUW: Yes, they are staying together but when he is attending
school, he is staying with me.

CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything that you would like to add in this
statement?

MS BLAAUW: There is nothing else besides the fact that I wish that there
could be this memorial stone that should be erected.

CHAIRPERSON: Do you also support this idea of this memorial?

MS BLAAUW: Yes, I support it.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much.

------------------

