	1	M M NDEBELE


	1	M M NDEBELE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	12.08.1996	NAME:	MARTHA MASHASHANE NDEBELE

CASE:	JB01009 	-	PRETORIA

DAY 1

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Can you hear the translation and make sure that it is on the
right channel there. I think it should be on channel three. If you can
just check, if the translator can please communicate and see that she
gets the right channel there. Apologies again, will be attended to
immediately. Thank you very much. If you can hand it over. Mrs Ndebele,
just before you give your evidence, will you please stand and raise your
right hand.

MARTHA MASHASHANE NDEBELE: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. You may take your seat. Mr Tom Manthata
will assist you in giving your testimony to the Commission.

MRS NDEBELE: In 1982 ...

MR MANTHATA: Sorry, you have already started then you can continue.

MRS NDEBELE: In 1982 the police use to come to my house threatening my
younger boy until I asked the relatives to take care of him. They use to
come day and night looking for him and I asked them where are they taking
him to and they told me he is attending COSAS meetings. In 1982 I use to
work night shifts. In the morning when I came back I asked his brother
Lucky and he told me that Lucky went to Johannesburg to a meeting and we
were surprised that they did not come back. While we were sitting the
police use to

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	M M NDEBELE

come and ask him for Lucky and they said I must tell them the truth and
tell them where my son was. I told them that I was also looking for my
son and I did not know where he was.

	After a while in 1986 I received a telegram from Lusaka. Alfred Nzo had
signed the telegram telling me that Lucky died in a car accident. We were
very shocked by that and there was another boy who was from COSAS. He
took the telegram with me to town. I do not remember the place. They took
me to that office. When we arrived there and they told us that they will
investigate about his death and told me to go home. I went home and
Solomon Ngwashini took the telegram the next day and he said he was
taking it to Priscilla Jana in Johannesburg so that she can investigate.
I waited for him. When he came back I asked how it went and he told me
that they said they will investigate further.

	I waited until the other guys who went into exile, Stanley and Elias,
came back. I asked why are they back safe and they told me that Lucky
died in exile. When I asked them what killed him they told me that it was
a hand grenade, but I was surprised that the telegram told me that he
died because of the accident. Those guys told me that they were together
with him when he died and they said he was an instructor and he was
killed by a hand grenade and he was buried there.

	I now ask the Truth Commission to help me at least find the remains of
Lucky, my son, so that I can bury him. Now I cannot see, I am blind.

MR MANTHATA: When the telegram came to you, was it from the ANC?

MRS NDEBELE: The telegram, when we opened it, it was

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	M M NDEBELE

addressed from Lusaka, from the ANC offices in Lusaka and Alfred Nzo had
signed it. They told me that it was, he got the car accident, but the
guys who came back from exile, who went there with him, they told me that
it was a bomb, not the car accident.

MR MANTHATA: Did they tell you that it was a hand grenade? Did they tell
you that he was a trainer?

MRS NDEBELE: Yes, they did.

MR MANTHATA: Was the telegram telling you that your son has passed away,
you must come to the funeral?

MRS NDEBELE: No, they did not ask me to come. They were just informing me
that my son was, had died, but when we went to ANC offices in town they
told me that I could not to go into exile because it was during the
apartheid era.

MR MANTHATA: Since when did you have the eye problem?

MRS NDEBELE: I now have three months. I spent a month at the hospital and
my other eye cannot see.

MR MANTHATA: Were you just sick?

MRS NDEBELE: Yes, I was just disturbed and my eye started to ache and
they operated on me at the hospital and after that I could not see.

MR MANTHATA: Were you worries because of the disappearance of Lucky or
you had other problems?

MRS NDEBELE: No, it was because of Lucky. When I always thought of him,
he was doing standard ten when he left so I was worried about that.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Any questions? Mrs Sooka.

MS SOOKA: Martha, can you tell us at any time, did anybody from the ANC
come to tell you officially what had happened to your son in Angola?

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	M M NDEBELE

MRS NDEBELE: After I received the telegram people came from the ANC at
Shell House. They said to me that Lucky has passed away. Then they said
they will come to visit me, but up till now no one has shown up at my
place.

MS SOOKA: Who told you then that it was a bomb, a hand grenade that had
killed your son?

MRS NDEBELE: Elias Mokgatha did inform me about that and Stanley Nkosi
did inform me about that.

MS SOOKA: You also mention in your statement that Ronnie Mamoepa also
came to see you. Is that correct?

MRS NDEBELE: Yes, it is correct.

MS SOOKA: What did he tell you?

MRS NDEBELE: Ronnie Mamoepa came to ask me since we hear that Lucky
passed away, we will come and pay a visit. We are still doing
investigations.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Dr Ally. Mrs Ndebele, I see you say that Ronnie Mamoepa when
he came to you, also gave the explanation that your son had been killed
by a bomb or a hand grenade and that your son had the alias of Patrick
Mkhwanazi. Is that correct?

MRS NDEBELE: Yes, that is correct.

CHAIRPERSON: This happened in 1986 whereas the disappearance happened in
February 1982, sorry 1986. So he had been away for four years already.

MRS NDEBELE: 1982.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you ever hear from him in the four years?

MRS NDEBELE: There is nothing that I heard from him. It was only the
telegram that informed me that he has passed away.

CHAIRPERSON: Do you still have the telegram that you got

PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	M M NDEBELE

from Mr Nzo?

MRS NDEBELE: The telegram was taken by Mr Solomon Ngwashini taking it to
Priscilla Jana. He never brought it back.

CHAIRPERSON: Did Mrs Priscilla Jana do a case on your behalf? Did she
approach the court or did she do anything for you?

MRS NDEBELE: I do not know the person, but according to Solomon's
explanation, he said that is our lawyer for the COSAS students and then
that is how it came that Solomon took the telegram to Priscilla Jana.

CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Mrs Ndebele, we will certainly further look into this
matter. We have already forwarded the statement that you have given us to
the ANC offices to see if they could shed further light on the matter for
us. If you could ask Solomon to see if he could get that telegram from
Mrs Priscilla Jana we will also appreciate it and your request to
identify your son's grave and to follow through on that. To see whether
he could be brought back, that will also be referred to the necessary
channels. We will in due course be communicating with you again. It will
not be too soon. We have a lot of work, but we have some time and we will
be working also on the information that you have given us. Thank you very
much that you have come to us and we wish you well.

	------------------------------













PRETORIA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

