
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	09-04-1997	

NAME:	NOMATEMBA A. NDINGANE

		NOSISI VIOLET PAYI

CASE: 	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 3



NOMATEMBA AGNES NDINGANE:	(sworn states)

NOSISI VIOLET PAYI:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	They have been sworn in accordingly Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRMAN:	We are now going to hand over to Tiny Maya.

MS MAYA:	Mama's I would like to welcome you. I would like to start with
Mrs Nomatemba Agnes Ndingane. The story that she is going to tell is
about Selby Zanemali Ndingane, who is said to have been shot dead in 1985
in Fort Beaufort.

	We would like you to just confirm whether the date which you remember
was in March 1985. According to the statement it says that he was shot
while going to the prayer service for a victim who had been shot. Do you
remember who that victim was?

MS NDINGANE:	I think it was Xolani Ntsangani.

MS MAYA:	What was happening in Fort Beaufort at the time can you remember
why people were being shot?

MS NDINGANE:	At the time?

MS MAYA:	Yes Ma'am.

MS NDINGANE:	What happened at the time is that things were very bad, you
could not even walk around, it was very bad. Police would shoot people at
random.

MS MAYA:	How old was Selby?

MS NDINGANE:	He was 16 years old.

MS MAYA:	Was he still a schoolgoing child?

MS NDINGANE:	Yes, he was doing standard 10 here at Lawson High School.

MS MAYA:	Was he politically active, was he involved in the political
organisations or in the community?

MS NDINGANE:	He was involved in the ANC at the time.

MS MAYA:	In the Youth League?

MS NDINGANE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	It is said that your heard that Selby was shot. Who told you
that he had been shot, how did the person come and tell you, what did
they say happened?

MS NDINGANE:	A child came at approximately six o'clock while I was
sleeping and knocked at the door. The child had also gone to the prayer
service for this deceased person and came to tell us that the people that
had gone to that service, had been assaulted and others were arrested.

	Selby was one of the people who was at that service. I was told that
some of them were at the police station. I then went and got my aunt and
we went there and when we got there, we were told to stand aside. We
stood aside. I think the Commander of the Police said that because there
were so many of us.

	It was then asked who the child's mother was and I heard him tell my
aunt, that the child had been injured, fatally injured and was at the
mortuary and the aunt said that I was the mother. And he said that he
sympathised with me, the child had been shot by the police.

	I then fainted and I - when I came to, I was at Mr Fani Mdange's house.
The following week we were told to go to the Investigators to find out
what happened. They told us that we should come back the Wednesday
morning and that a post-mortem was going to be conducted at the Day
Hospital.

	We then went at one o'clock and went to Stompie's, it was performed and
my aunt went in because I could not handle it, I was ill. My aunt went in
and came out with her hands full of blood and we were told to get
transport and take him to a mortuary.

MS MAYA:	Let us finish off, we are going to be very brief. You say that
she came out with her hands full of blood, did she tell you why?

MS NDINGANE:	No, we were told to take him, we looked for transport and
took him to Newtown to a place there and then we went back to the
Investigators and we were given a burial date. We were told not to bury
him over the weekend, but to bury him either on a Wednesday - Tuesday or
Wednesday and not too many people were to attend.

	I then told them that his fellow students were going to go. I was told
that they had to be in the yard and not outside the yard, and that when
the police came, I should show them the letter.

MS MAYA:	Were you not harassed in any way on the day of the funeral?

MS NDINGANE:	No, the police were there in their caspers.

MS MAYA:	Is there anything that you would like to add lastly before we
finish off or is that all you would like to say?

MS NDINGANE:	In September I received a summons and I went to court and
told them that I was summonsed and they said that they called me in to
tell me, the Prosecutor told me that he called me in to let me know that
my child was killed by the police. It seems that the Prosecutor has since
died in a car accident and I wanted to know who the police were

and I was told that no, we are merely going to tell you that policemen
are responsible for the death of your son, we are not going to tell you
who those police are.

MS MAYA:	Were those police ever prosecuted?

MS NDINGANE:	At the time we did not know what we could do, but we were
told that the police were responsible although he did not want to tell us
who the police were that were responsible.

MS MAYA:	Is that in the Fort Beaufort court?

MS NDINGANE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Did you have an Attorney?

MS NDINGANE:	No, we did not.

MS MAYA:	Is there any request which you would like to make?

MS NDINGANE:	My request is that the Truth Commission please see what I
can do because I don't even know who those police are that shot my child
and my child was doing standard 10 at Lawson and I am sure that my dreams
for my child to become something and then work for me and take care of
me, would have been fulfilled.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Ma'am. We would now like to go to Mrs Nosisi Violet
Payi. Mrs Payi, your story is about Bukelwa Notargane Payi. Was she your
daughter?

MS PAYI:	She was my brother's daughter, but she was staying with me.

MS MAYA:	Was she also shot on this day?

MS PAYI:	Yes, it was on the 8th of March in Ntsangani's home.

MS MAYA:	How old was Bukelwa at that time?

MS PAYI:	She was born in 1970.

MS MAYA:	In other words she was 15 years old?

MS PAYI:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Was she still at school?

MS PAYI:	Yes, she was doing standard 5 at the time.

MS MAYA:	Did you find out why they were shot by the police?

MS PAYI:	They were attending this night vigil of Xolani Ntsangani, he was
from Debe. That day it was not a riot night vigil, because even older
people were attending this night vigil.

	I was sleeping at home, this child told me that she was attending this
night vigil. In the morning while I was still wondering where she was,
one other child came telling me that people have been assaulted in the
night vigil. On the 9th of March at quarter to nine I saw a police van.

	There was a Black Detective, Makalima and one White Detective. Makalima
came in, he greeted us. We agreed, he then sat down. He asked whether we
are the Payi family, I said yes. He asked whether we knew Bukelwa Payi, I
said yes, that is my child.

	I asked what happened to her, he said that she had been shot. I said
what? He said that she had been shot yesterday. I asked him where she
was. He said that she was in Van der Baker Mortuary. I said what
happened, he said that she died.

	I was confused. They then left. Because I have a heart problem, I said
to my brother they must go to Stompie. They did, she was there. She was
shot in the head. We then decided to take her to Newtown parlour in the
Coloured area.

	We then buried her the following week. I tried to consult my family to
help me so that we can bury her because I am a pensioner.

MS MAYA:	Were you disrupted by the police in the funeral?

MS PAYI:	No, we were not disrupted, but only 200 people

were allowed to attend the funeral.

MS MAYA:	Did you allow that order?

MS PAYI:	The people did attend the funeral, the police were all over,
they were surrounding us. Their police vans were in the field next to the
graveyards, but nothing happened.

MS MAYA:	Did you know who killed Bukelwa?

MS PAYI:	No, we did not know. We only heard from Makalima that she was
shot by the police.

MS MAYA:	Did you get something from the Magistrate saying that she was
shot by the police?

MS PAYI:	No.

MS MAYA:	Did you open a case?

MS PAYI:	No, we did not open a case. We just left this in God's hands
that if these people are killing people, they must continue doing that.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Ma'am, is that all you have to say?

MS PAYI:	Yes, that is all.

MS MAYA:	Do you have a request or a wish to make to the Commission?

MS PAYI:	Yes, I do have a request to the Commission because I am a
pensioner, my child would have been educated today. She would have worked
in the office or somewhere else, because our children have pride in their
minds or they are intelligent.

MS MAYA:	In other words you are saying that your daughter would have been
supporting you today?

MS PAYI:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	I am going to hand over to the Chairperson, thank you.

CHAIRPERSON:	We thank both of you. Your story have touched us. Mrs Payi's
words have also touched us that she

gave this to God's hands.

	We hope that what the Commission is doing, all the questions will be
answered. All your prayers will be answered. We will try to investigate.
We will also consult Makalima to try to clarify this matter to tell us
what happened.

	Mrs Ndingane, you named your son Zanemali, because you hoped that one
day he will bring money in your family, but that did not happen.

	We have noted your request and we will forward them to the President.
For now we thank you.

	--------------------

