TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23-07-1996	NAME:	 WILSON NDLETYANA

CASE: QUEENSTOWN

DAY 2



REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman. I would like you to take oaths as
individuals. How many are you? There are four of you. All right, who is
Nondleko? Who is Eric and who is Wilson? What about these two, have they
come to give testimony too? Do you want me to make her take an oath too?
Thank you.

	Dinah Loliwe, could you rise?

NONDLEKO NOLIFISI DINAH LOLIWE:	(sworn states)

ERIC MBANGO:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	 Thank you.

WILSON NDLETYANA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	What is your name?

UNKNOWN VOICE:	My name is Noqwaqa.

REVD XUNDU:	Is that your real name or the name you were given when you
got married?

UNKNOWN VOICE:	My name is Gloria.

GLORIA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU;	And what about you, what is your name?

UNKNOWN VOICE:	Thandiqolo.

THANDIQOLO:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. I'm through Mr Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	We thank you Revd Xundu for swearing these people in who come
from Molteno who, we think they are

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			T NDLETYANA

together, the three of them are together because their testimonies are
identical. They shall be giving testimony about the death of school
children in the area of Molteno.

	We welcome you people from Molteno and we thank you for availing
yourselves before this TRC. We are now going to give you an opportunity
to give your testimony and tell us everything that you know of what
happened in Molteno in 1985.

	We are therefore going to ask Ms Tiny Maya to take this opportunity and
ask you some questions. Thank you.

MS MAYA;	Thank you Commissioner. I greet you. Mr Ndletyana, when we
talked earlier, you decided that you are the one who's going to give the
testimony about the details and everything that happened in Molteno in
1985 up to the time when these children were killed. What actually
happened in Molteno at that time?

W NDLETYANA:	Commissioners, I would like to say in Molteno when all this
uprising started, it was at school, started with school children.

MS MAYA:	I would like you to go closer to the microphone.

W NDLETYANA:	When it all started, it started with the school children. We
don't actually know what the cause of it was because whilst we were still
waiting, trying to find out what had happened and what was the intention,
the school children too did not know the beginning of all this, because
at school they are the old ones and the young ones.

	The old ones instructed the young ones to go home and truly speaking
they actually anticipated that policemen were coming and really policemen
came to the school in vans and hippo's.

	It is said that policemen just threw the tear gas at

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			W NDLETYANA

the children and the children got scattered, running away to all
directions.			

	That is how it all started. And then because I am actually presenting
Tanduxolo my son, who was not a scholar at the time, but he had just come
from work from Bloemfontein, but because we had some younger children who
were attending school at that time, he ran to the place to go and see to
his younger brothers and sisters and that was the time he met this
shooting and problem.

	That is when there was this chasing of the elder children by the police
until Tanduxolo was shot at, hitting him at the back of the ear with the
bullet piercing through the cheek.

	He was the first victim then in Molteno, he was the first victim.
Thereafter, there are many others who became victims. These are not the
only ones. There are others who are still coming.

MS MAYA:	What happened when he was shot?

W NDLETYANA:	When Tanduxolo was shot at, he was taken, thrown into the
back of a van, taken to hospital where the hospital asked for an
ambulance to take him to East London.

MS MAYA:	Which hospital was that?

W NDLETYANA:	He was transferred to the Frere Hospital.

MS MAYA:	No, I'm asking where he was admitted at first?

W NDLETYANA:	That was Molteno Hospital which later transferred him to
East London. All this time the policemen did not even make means that we
as the parents of Tanduxolo should be informed of what they had done to
our son.

MS MAYA:	Who actually told you?

W NDLETYANA:	An ambulance came as I was working at the garage and told me
that - where was my son, then I went

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			W NDLETYANA

there, but I couldn't say a thing, I was dumbfounded because he was
already useless and his whole body was covered with blood and I had
nothing to say.

	I then asked for permission from my employers. When I asked for
permission from my employers because my son had been shot at, he said you
could leave your work at your own risk and go and attend to that son of
yours and when you come back from there, you should bring your ID book so
that I can sign on it and then I interpret it as being discharged from
work.

	Because there was my cousin there next to the garage, I asked my cousin
to accompany my son and I was really hurt by the words that was said by
my employer that if he dies on the way, in fact I was, I said to my
cousin, if Tanduxolo dies on the way because I could see he was in a very
bad condition.

MS MAYA:	How long was he in hospital?

W NDLETYANA:	He was there from 1985 for three months. He came back in
November.

MS MAYA:	And how was he when he came back?

W NDLETYANA;	On that day I could see that he was not completely conscious.

MS MAYA:	Was he actually discharged by the hospital?

W NDLETYANA:	Yes, he was. On coming back from hospital in the morning, at
about three in fact, a White policeman came to our house and when I let
him into the house, he said he wanted Tanduxolo.

	Then I asked why, then he said you will hear about it tomorrow.

MS MAYA:	Where was that?

W NDLETYANA:	At the police station. I would hear about it QUEENSTOWN
HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			W NDLETYANA

at the police station the following morning and I was very unhappy and I
asked myself what was it all about.

	Then he promised that they could perhaps bring him back, they just
wanted to find some information from him. They took him away and what
actually happened, he was detained there at the police station for a long
time.

	Even when I came there at seven o'clock they said, the policeman said
they were arresting Tanduxolo because on the 12th of August he had stoned
at the policemen and then I asked them, where was that stone that he had
used because I wanted to see its size.

	The police asked me whether I was a lawyer or what. Then I said no, I am
the father of Tanduxolo, I am not a lawyer, then they said, we are laying
a charge against Tanduxolo.

MS MAYA:	Was he actually charged? Were there allegations against him?

W NDLETYANA;	Yes, he was charged. Allegations were laid on him for
throwing stones at the police and the court case was to be in Dordrecht.
We did go to court three times and he would be discharged and rearrested.

	On the third time the lawyer by the name of Naidoo, who is now a member
of the Parliament, tried to defend and - because the killer of Tanduxolo
was Potgieter, that is the name of the police who shot at Tanduxolo.

	He was then sent to the Komani Hospital where he spent a long time.

MS MAYA:	Was he disturbed mentally?

W NDLETYANA:	Yes, he was, that is - he was mentally disturbed such that
he was behaving abnormally.

MS MAYA:	The one who shot him, Potgieter, where is he now?

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			W NDLETYANA

W NDLETYANA;	Potgieter was transferred from Molteno to Colesburg and in
Colesburg too, we leant that he was also transferred to Stellenbosch.

MS MAYA:	Does he still work as a policeman?

W NDLETYANA:	Yes, that's what we think, because we never heard of it that
he actually resigned from the police force.

MS MAYA:	According to you, your son who was injured by this policeman was
employed and he was on holiday at the time.

W NDLETYANA:	Yes, it is like that.

MS MAYA;	Did he manage to work after this incident?

W NDLETYANA:	No, up to now he is not working.

MS MAYA:	What does he do at home?

W NDLETYANA:	He just sits there at home.

MS MAYA:	Does he have a family?

W NDLETYANA;	No, he hasn't got, he is still my dependant.

MS MAYA:	How long was he in hospital?

W NDLETYANA;	It was quite a long time in the Komani Hospital that he
stayed. I remember that one year I received a letter from him which he
had written whilst he was out of hospital.

	He was in jail in Queenstown, which I don't even know where it is.

MS MAYA;	How did that happen?

W NDLETYANA:	I also got confused and asked the hospital how could this
happen. I move from Molteno to the hospital and gave them the letter. On
the day I arrived at the hospital, there were policemen who came with
Tanduxolo, who were taking him to the hospital to be readmitted for the
second time.

	I don't know what they had noticed.

MS MAYA;	According to what you had heard, why - for how

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			W NDLETYANA

long did the policemen keep him in jail?

W NDLETYANA:	For 6 months and then they again took him back to hospital.

MS MAYA:	And then, how long did he spend - how much time did he spend in
hospital?

W NDLETYANA:	I think he came back in 1989, I think it is three years, if
I'm counting well.

MS MAYA:	Yes, did you get any reply from the hospital, any explanation
from the hospital?

W NDLETYANA:	The explanation was that he had been taken by a surgeon from
Queenstown, then I asked but how did that happen, they could not tell me
how it happened.

	After that I did not investigate, nor ask any further questions, because
I could not get the head or tail of it. They could not tell me exactly
what had happened. I had made means when he was in East London to ask for
a rail warrant to visit my son in East London, then the Magistrate said
it was available at the police station and the police station said it was
available at the Magistrate's office.

MS MAYA:	Was he ever arrested or Potgieter - was there any charge laid
against Potgieter because of what he had done?

W NDLETYANA:	No, there wasn't.

MS MAYA:	Is there any other additional information or you want to make a
request to this Commission?

W NDLETYANA:	Yes, there is. This was my hope that this son of mine would
help me, therefore I would ask this Commission to make means that
Potgieter should be taken to court where he is going to meet me.	

	And thereafter, when I have heard how it all happened and what is the
end of this, I will then request this Commission to help me because my
son is still young. He

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8			W NDLETYANA

could work for me if he was normal and we are a poor family.

	Perhaps the Commission could see what they can teach him or perhaps they
could see what they can do for him, that is my request to this Commission.

MS MAYA:	Is there still need that he should get medical treatment?

W NDLETYANA:	Yes, because he says the Doctor here in Queenstown said that
he could never work again, such that he said that he was going to
organise that he gets the disability grant, which he is getting even at
the moment, now that he is out of hospital.

