
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	12 MAY 1997		

NAME:	FEZILE NDONGENI

CASE:		KING WILLIAM'S TOWN

DAY:		1

_______________________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We will now ask the attorney, Mr Mlalane together with
Fezile Ndongeni to come forward. Mr Mlalane, you are representing Fezile
Ndongeni on the matter?

MR MLALANE: I do.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Do you want to address us? Are you going to lead
the witness? Are you going to read the statement into the record?

MR MLALANE: I am just going to make a short resume of what happened and
then he is going to do the talking himself. He can talk, he is old
enough. First of all ...

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Go ahead Mr Mlalane.

MR MLALANE: Thanks. First of all, this matter is a matter of inquest at
Alice and judgement has been reserved and the real problem is finding
witnesses and this happened at night. Apparently there were two groups of
the African National Congress and the two groups were not in agreement
and there is no evidence yet that my client was the leader of the other
group, but is suspicious that he was probably taking a leading part and
my client, as he says, was he friend of Mr Papu. Mr Papu was actually
brought by him to that area. There was no animosity, but in the middle of
the night there was this fight. My client ...

CHAIRPERSON: Can I just clarify something, Mr Mlalane. You say this
matter is already before the court.

MR MLALANE: It is already before the court and judgement ...

CHAIRPERSON: And you are awaiting judgement?

MR MLALANE: We are awaiting judgement and I am appearing in the case.

CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to insist on addressing us on this matter or are
you feeling that, perhaps, you are obliged to do so because we sent you a
notice? I am just afraid ...

MR MLALANE: I feel I am obliged to, otherwise, because this court does
not know anything of sub-judaica. Otherwise I would have raised that this
is sub-judaica, because we are awaiting judgement in this case.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I would like to consult with the Committee quickly and,
perhaps, let us come back to you, just. Sir, you consulted us
(indistinct)?

MR MLALANE: Yes I am (indistinct).

CHAIRPERSON: (Indistinct). Mr Mlalane, that we accept and just put it on
record and when we are contemplating making a finding on Mr Ndongeni we
will then inform you and then you can make representation at that stage.

MR MLALANE: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you sir.

MR MLALANE: May I be excused.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes, please.

	------------------------------

