
	1	Z NELANI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	20.06.1996	NAME:	ZOYISILE NELANI

CASE:	EC0171/96		-	UMTATA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

MEMBER OF PANEL: Mr Chairperson we would like to call Mr Nelani to take
the stand please. Mr Chairperson Mr Nelani who is here in front of us is
one of the men who comes from Umputi where the Chief Joyi and the others
come from. They were all exposed to persecution, prosecution and tortures
as they were trying to liberate the country and they also tried to bring
justice. He is here also to give explanations of what use to happen at
that time. We would like to thank him for being here and we are very
grateful that the people who come from the rural areas could come forward
because some people from the urban areas believe that they are the only
people who contributed to the liberation struggle. They do not recognise
the importance and the role which was played by the people from the rural
areas. This is because there were no newspapers and no people to
publicise what they were doing. We are very grateful for your presence
here and we would like to know that the people from the villages were
also contributing to the struggle and we should salute them for what they
have done. Your efforts are being acknowledged. You can see that we
rejoice today because we can claim that we are free. We have the
Government of the people. That is why we say the Commission is very proud
of you. I would like you to stand up so that you can take an oath.

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	2	Z NELANI

ZOYISILE NELANI: (Duly sworn in, states).

MEMBER OF PANEL: Thank you. Over to you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Sandi.

MR SANDI: Mr Nelani, as far as I can see from your statement you are
going to talk about two things. Firstly you are going to talk about
things that happened to you. Being arrested, being tortured in detention
by South African Police and Transkei Police. Secondly, you will be
talking about the death of your neighbour, Mr Twalimfene Joyi, who was
shot by a Traffic Officer here in the Transkei. Is that correct Mr Nelani?

MR NELANI: Yes, that is correct Sir.

MR SANDI: Which one would you like to start with? Would you like to start
talking about the first one that affects you directly or are you going to
talk first about Mr Joyi's case?

MR NELANI: Mr Commissioner I would like to talk about first Joyi's case.

MR SANDI: Excuse me Mr Nelani, my colleague here, Mr Ntsebeza, he is
nudging me. He says he knows much about this case, about the death of
Twalimfene Joyi. He is going to guide you about this case. He will hand
you over again to me when he is through with Twalimfene Joyi's case.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Nel, this case is quite a well known case. Now, before we
can go and dig in about Twalimfene it will be, we would appreciate it if
you can just tell us more about Twalimfene. Who Twalimfene was before you
actually come into the day in 1976 when something happened to him.

MR NELANI: Thank you Commissioner. Firstly, I am going to talk about his
birth. Twalimfene Joyi was born through Dalunga Joyi. There are three men
here from Joyi family.

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	3	Z NELANI

They are all from the family tree of the Joyi's. The first one is
Mangaliswe Joyi, second is Dalagube Joyi, next one is now Twalimfene
Joyi's father. These are brothers.

	Twalimfene became prominent especially as an orator especially regarding
the political matters. I can say that in our area he is the one, he was
the leader in the campaigning of our political matters. He was a member
of the ANC such that during his presence all the men of my age at the
time use to be his followers. We use to believe quite a lot in what he
use to say. Earlier today the Commissioners heard from Mr Sigwela about
Twalimfene Joyi's arrest. He use to be arrested with them. When he came
back from Robben Island he was banned for two years. This was now before
his death. During the time of his banning he got a job here in Umtata in
the bus transport department. That is where he use to work.

	Now on a certain day, it was during the weekend, Twalimfene was
plastering a certain house at home. He talked to Bangilizwe Joyi who was
his older brother who use to have a tractor. He asked for the tractor so
that he can transport sand from the Basha River. He did give it to him.
He was also given a driver to drive this tractor. So they went on with
the transporting of this sand. At the time the Basha River was
overflowing because of the rains that use to fall at that time. When they
came back it was wet. The rain fell again just for a while. He was
walking on foot, the tractor was driven by this young boy. The tractor
was a little bit far from the road. When the Traffic Cops saw this
tractor they came towards the tractor. Apparently, when he saw the
Traffic Cops he slowed down and the boy stopped the tractor and ran away.

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	4	Z NELANI

	When the Traffic Cops saw that the boy has run away they went to him.
Now that is Twalimfene, the boy, Joyi. Apparently these policemen were
looking for him for a long time because there was no reason for these
cops to go to him when he was not the driver of the tractor. Now,
apparently, this policeman followed him. They went over the hill and then
later bullet shots were heard by the people who were next to this place,
but nobody actually realised what really happened. This other policeman,
in a mysterious way, he just left. He asked the other boys where this
tractor use to belong to. So they were told that it belongs to the
Chief's place. So when they went to the Chief's house before this other
one who went with Joyi came back. This other policeman asked who was the
driver of the tractor, but the way that he asked this question, he did
not ask who was the driver of the tractor, he just asked who is your
driver, Sir. Now Chief Bangilizwe gave them Sobetwa's name who was the
Chief's driver. He did not mention the boy because this boy did not have
a licence. While they were still talking this other policeman came back
and his pants were wet. It was obvious that he was walking in the tall
grass. He also wanted to know that who was the driver. Then he was told.
He did not ask that he was leaving somebody next to the banks of the
river and the person was injured. They got into the car and they left for
Umtata.

	After a while the boy arrived again. He then reported that the man he
was with was followed by a Traffic Officer, but nobody took this into
cognisance because, but later when he did not come back people wanted to
find out what happened, but nobody could see where he was and we would
tried to ask, but nobody could see anything. In the

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	5	Z NELANI

following morning they started to take some steps now. They tried to go
and report because they could not find him anywhere. Now, in short, they
came to the police. They reported the case. We were still looking for him
on the other side and there was another trace that there was another man
who has been shot by the Traffic Officers and after shooting him they
dragged him to the river. It took us two weeks for us to get the body. We
found the body in another location at Nabane location in Idutywa. When we
got there the people there said they picked this body up at the
riverbanks.

	As we usually do with a body we, there was a funeral. It was very
difficult for us to get into the water because it was full. The body was
buried on the other side next, in Idutywa not on the other side which
belongs to Umtata district. When the body was exhumed we did identify
that it was him. Now, after we had exhumed him we had to bury him again.
This time now we buried him officially. Now that was the time now we had
to give the report to the police. Some police were investigated about
this. After we have told them that we have exhumed this body and reburied
it we had to go again back to Idutywa to see the District Doctor so that
this body can be looked at to see, to have a post mortem. We did buy a
coffin so that if this body had to be brought back again we must have
something to put it in.

	The person who talked to the doctor, it was his elder brother, Chief
Bangilizwe. He brought the doctor to the river and it was the doctor who
said there must be something like a jug, just a container so that we can
carry water, but we did not even know what the water was going to be for.
We did all that. When we got there we were forced again to

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	6	Z NELANI

exhume the body. When we did that the doctor said the reason why he
wanted a container was that he wanted to make an experiment to make sure
that, to make sure if this body went into the river when it was already
dead or when the person was still alive. He said he was going to cut a
piece of his lung and after cutting that piece of lung he was going to
put into this water and if the person has been drowned while still alive
in this water, this piece of lung is going to go down into the bottom of
the container, but if this person was put into the river when he was
already dead, this piece of lung is going to float on the water. Indeed
he cut a piece of his lung on his left lung and then he put it into the
water, but that piece of lung simply floated, it did not go down. Then he
said, yes indeed, he went into the river when he was already dead. Again,
we had to rebury the body now with the coffin that we had brought with us.

	Now we had to wait for the authorities from the police so that we can
rebury the body. Even on that day we were now, we were going to ask
experts to investigate and examine the body so that we can see what
killed him, that is a post mortem. When the day of the post mortem came
we again went to go and exhume the body. Now we were together with the
police and it was the police that brought the body to Umtata. Then we
were told what time the doctors would come here in Umtata. We were here
at eight am. We stayed here for the whole day until it was four pm. There
were no doctors even though we were told that they were going to be here
at nine. They came after four. They were already in a hurry touching here
and there. After that they said, no, they cannot see anything. That is
now how we were officially given the body to go and bury it again and yet
we UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	7	Z NELANI

were not satisfied at all. When we wanted to find out why did they come
so late, we were trying to find this out, but later we discovered that
they were in Butterworth the whole day. They were talking together with
the Government. We do not know why they were, what they were talking
about and then we were forced to bury the body again without getting any
report of a post mortem regarding his death.

	Later the policemen went on saying that they are investigating such that
this Traffic Officer while he was surrounded by the policemen regarding
the bullets that were missing in his gun, he said, no, he had fired in
the air. So then he was asked why did he shoot in the air in the first
place, where is the driver of the tractor? He then said that the person,
the driver that he had met was Sobetwa, then he was asked do you know
Sobetwa. Then he said yes, he know who Sobetwa was and he can even point
him. Then there was an identification parade. We were also there. This
Traffic Officer, his name was Kalipa, could not identify Sobetwa. He
simply identified another policeman who use to work at Qumbu. It is there
now because he could not identify then the Investigating Officer had the
authority now to arrest him because he could not identify this driver.

	Now, on the third day of his arrest there was a command from K D
Matanzima, who was the leader of the country at that time, that this
Traffic Officer must be released because he has not done anything. So
then he was released. At the time the Council of Churches had delegated a
field worker who could help with the investigation. His name was M Sooki.
He helped out quite a lot because he even had witnesses, but what was the
problem was that he was now

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	8	Z NELANI

arrested by the Security Policemen. He was kept for two years here in the
Transkei prison, that the office of the South African Council of Churches
was banned. So that all those who had their human rights violated should
not have anyone to defend them. Later on the South African Council of
Churches tried to make amends, but it looks like that is the reason why
the South African Council of Churches was banned. There was never even an
inquest. That is just how it was ended. That is how Twalimfene Joyi. We
still feel hurt about his death. We will never forget it. It will always
remain in our history.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Excuse me Nel, can you still remember the month of Joyi's
death?

MR NELANI: It was in March.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Was it 1976?

MR NELANI: Yes, it was 1976.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Can you still remember that at that time, the precise time
of Twalimfene's death?

MR NELANI: If I can just remember well, it was on the 31st of March 1976.

ADV NTSEBEZA: There was another man who was arrested in Durban. His name
Mhlole.

MR NELANI: Yes, they almost died at the same time, Mhlole and Joyi.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Mhlole died less than 24 hours before he was arrested?

MR NELANI: Yes.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Mhlole and Joyi were they together in the Robben Island?

MR NELANI: Yes, that is correct.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Yes, you can get on into the next issue.

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE

	9	Z NELANI

MR NELANI: There were many events that use to surround these two men,
these men from the Joyi family. Now in 1978 it was myself and Bangilizwe.

ADV NTSEBEZA: Excuse me Mr Nelani, are you now talking about this
incident that affects you directly?

MR NELANI: No, there is just one other part that I do not want to leave
out. Then after that I am coming to my case now. I think we only had two
weeks and then on the third week these men, the Joyis' were banished,
were banned. I am the one who was transporting them into their places.
First I went to put Dalanuba to Majeke. Then from there I went to put
Bangilizwe into Mtingweni. On the following week there was chaos in the
Transkeian Parliament. They were fighting about the positions. There were
questions in Matanzima's Government, why were these people arrested and
being charged if they were guilty. Now just Matanzima's answer was, who
was the Minister of Justice at that time, he said we cannot investigate
this mans case. He then pointed out certain deaths about certain people
and he said the deaths of those people are connected with these Joyis'.
He mentioned the death of another Chief from Tentu, his name was Dadile.
He also mentioned the death of two men, the Chief of the Kwatis', Makile
and his second in command, Thandile. He also mentioned about his, another
Chief. He also talked about another one who use to work in the forest who
killed people and then after that he, personally, was killed. Now all
those incidents he connected them with the Joyis'. Only to find out, as
you have heard here before, Bangilizwe left in 1958. Then he came back
home in 1964 and all these events happened when this man had already left
because all these happened in 1961 and yet he left in 1958.

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	10	Z NELANI

Then we were forced as the people who were left behind, we were supposed
now to answer what George was talking about, but I was the one who made
that statement. I took the statement to the offices of the Daily
Dispatch, the Daily Dispatch newspaper. At that time there was Sydney
Moses. I gave the statement to him. Within a week I went back to go and
check and then he said to me, no, the Management had refused and then he
said if he could publish that statement, now the Daily Dispatch newspaper
could be in trouble because of the Government that was not going to allow
that to be published. Then later that statement was published. It was
just a couple of lines. I would like to mention this because these people
were accused of murder.

	Now coming back to my own story. Commissioner, we have run out of time,
but I will try and be brief so that everybody can have a chance. I
understand that this is the last day, but my story is a very long one. I
am going to start, I will start in 1970. In 1970 I was in Gauteng. Then I
was arrested there after we had a meeting as workers. We were a bigger
group. I was with another man from Transkei. I am very hurt about the
fact that he has also disappeared. He was from Nqamakwe. He was Mr Mviti,
his name was Pindile. We were together, we were tortured by another Boer
called Taylor for three days and then after that we were released. We
were tortured by electrical shocks. Then after that I was arrested again
here in the Transkei.

MR SANDI: And Mr Nelani was it now at the time of your torture by
electric shocks by Mr Taylor, do you have any other names that you can
still remember who were together with Mr Taylor?

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	11	Z NELANI

MR NELANI: Yes, I know some. There is another policeman, another white
policeman, his name was Erasmus. There was another one called van
Millier, another one was Strydom. Those were the ones who tortured us.
Then after that we were arrested in 1976 here in the Transkei. Yes, I was
arrested, but it was before the independence.

MR SANDI: When did you come back from Gauteng now that you have been
arrested in 1976?

MR NELANI: I was only visiting for a while here because this is my home.
Transkei is my home and that is when I got arrested.

MR SANDI: At the time of your arrest was it at the time of the
independence?

MR NELANI: Yes.

MR SANDI: Was there any resistance against this independence at the time?

MR NELANI: All those who were against the independence were arrested. All
those people who were against the Transkeian independence were arrested.

MR SANDI: Did you know why were people against the independence of the
Transkei?

MR NELANI: The reasons of their resistance was that they knew that they
will never have any other rights as human beings.

MR SANDI: Me Nelani, if I remember well, this 1976 we are talking about,
now the time that you were arrested here in the Transkei only because you
were against ... Now, what I want to know is at the time while you were
inside, in the cells, when you were being interrogated, were there any
questions that you were asked from those who use to interrogate you
regarding the unrest, this national

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	12	Z NELANI

uprising that use to be in South Africa in 1976.

MR NELANI: No, I was never questioned about that unrest.

MR SANDI: Then on the 24th of September 1977 were you arrested again, is
it not?

MR NELANI: Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI: You were detained for six months. Why were you arrested? Under
which Law?

MR NELANI: I was arrested under Act number 47.

MR SANDI: Was this the Act that says if you are arrested you can never
even go to Court, you will be detained for those six months without even
knowing why you were in jail?

MR NELANI: That is correct, that is exactly correct Commissioner.

MR NELANI: Now again, on that 24 of September 1977 which you were
arrested on, Mr Steve Biko was he already dead in the cells?

MR NELANI: That is correct. Such that I was together with Reverend
Tintilie in the cells. He was one of the people who was arranging for Mr
Biko's funeral.

MR SANDI: Were you being asked about Bangilizwe Joyi?

MR NELANI: That is right.

MR SANDI: What did they ask you about him?

MR NELANI: They wanted to find out what were Chief Bangilizwe's aims in
politics because he was a Chief, a traditional Chief.

MR SANDI: So did you get out of prison in March 1978? Were there any
other restrictions that you were under?

MR NELANI: No, there were no restrictions.

MR SANDI: And then in 1979 when you were arrested again for having
unlawful pamphlets and illegal documents with you. What were these
documents about?

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	13	Z NELANI

MR NELANI: These pamphlets were talking about the arrest of King Sabata.
They were also about the way people were treated in prisons here in the
Transkei, all those political prisoners. These pamphlets also were
talking about the fact that political prisoners were not allowed to make
any appeals because the Judges at that time did not allow anyone to
appeal especially political prisoners. Especially, here is another
example. The Commissioner here, Mr Dumisa Ntsebeza, was one of those
people who were denied the right to appeal such that there was a
petition. That is the only time that they allowed the appeal, but even
this whole period that he was in jail, his cries were not listened to.

MR SANDI: Who issued all these pamphlets? Was there an organisation or
maybe a group of people, perhaps, that you were part of? A group that was
responsible for the pressing of these pamphlets.

MR NELANI: The ANC was responsible for the distribution of these
pamphlets, but all that was done underground.

MR SANDI: You said you were arrested for the possession of illegal
pamphlets. You were in a car at that time. What happened to this car?

MR NELANI: I started at Tongwo from there I went to Nqamakwe. Then from
there I went to Butterworth. I use to distribute those pamphlets at
night. Then when I was in the Idutywa district I came across a security
car, but when I passed it I thought if they could catch me now they would
catch me red-handed. We were two in this car. This other mans name was
Thembile Maginga. We came to Umtata. We went down Alexandra Road then we
went to the township. We had left the pamphlets already in town, but it
is when we got into the township when we were trying to get into Kwezi

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	14	Z NELANI

township when we met the police. We saw two policemen just near us.

MR SANDI: I would like to interrupt you now. Let us go back to the cells.
As you know that if a person has been arrested, what happened to you
while you were in the cells and who did that to you?

MR NELANI: After being arrested, after being told that I must leave my
car where we were arrested we were taken to the charge office. We were
welcomed by a lot of assault by the policemen in the charge office. They
assaulted us so much. One of those people was Lavisa, another policeman
from the Security Forces. Another one was Dingana, another one was
Molife, Sergeant Msuko, Neba was an onlooker though he did not do
anything, but he was there watching.

MR SANDI: Who are Lavisa and Neba?

MR NELANI: Neba is Martin Neba. He was the Head of the police at the time.

MR SANDI: And who is Lavisa?

MR NELANI: Lavisa was in the Security Department. His name was Zulisa.

MR SANDI: What is he doing now?

MR NELANI: Today Zulisa is a Deputy Commissioner. He is the second in
command in the higher ranks in the police department in the South African
Police Service.

MR SANDI: How do you feel about this?

MR NELANI: Commissioner, there is a problem here because the Government
does not come to us and find out who the Government should put in their
high ranks. The Government was supposed to do a referendum. People like
that were not supposed to be put in high ranks because they were
murderers. Murderers were not supposed to be put up in such UMTATA
HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	15	Z NELANI

high ranks. If those people are still kept in those high ranks this South
Africa will never be well again.

MR SANDI: Again, Mr Nelani, you said three white policemen arrived from
East London.

MR NELANI: On the third day when I was still in the cell, now I had
already been separated from my friend Maginga. Three white policemen
arrived, then I was handed over to them who took me and opened the boot.
I was still hand-cuffed. I had leg irons as well. They just lifted me up
then they threw me into the boot and they shut the boot. The car was gone.

MR SANDI: Now who was lifting you up?

MR NELANI: It is these three white men. There was another young security
policeman from Transkei who was called Nongogo. He was there when I was
being picked up and put into the boot of the car.

MR SANDI: This Mr Maginga you have just mentioned, is it the same one who
had a private security company?

MR NELANI: Yes, that is exactly him. His name is Lucky Maginga.

MR SANDI: Okay, let us pass on. While you were in Cambridge what happened
there?

MR NELANI: While I was still in the boot I only saw that now I was in
Cambridge when they opened the boot. Then I was put inside.

MR SANDI: Is this Cambridge Police Station the one in East London.

MR NELANI: That is correct.

MR SANDI: According to my knowledge at the time, is that not at the time
the then Government in Pretoria and those in authority here in the
Transkei said Transkei has its own

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	16	Z NELANI

independence?

MR NELANI: Yes, that was the time that the Transkei was still under the
impression that it had an independence. Commissioner there is one more
thing that I would like to emphasise on. I was beaten up very much by
these men. Men like Lavisa, Dingana, Molife and Nongogo. They really
assaulted me while I was in Norwood.

MR SANDI: Were you again arrested in 1980 for treason and at the time
when you were arrested for treason, in which prison were you and what
happened to you while you were in prison?

MR NELANI: I was sentenced while I was in Wellington and the kind of
treatment that I received there was very severe. Such that one of us,
King Peter, we had big problems regarding King Peter because as we
usually receive letters from our relatives, they usually go via the
Security Police who had arrested us. They were the ones who use to read
them and censor them before we could read them.

MR SANDI: Is King Peter the same one who was mentioned by one of the
witnesses here yesterday?

MR NELANI: Yes Commissioner, it is the same King Peter.

MR SANDI: Mr Nelani, has your explanation of your ill torture ending up
there before I hand over to the Commissioner?

MR NELANI: Yes, that is the end of it because I was now sentenced and I
stayed in prison for five years and again when I got there I was taken by
the Security Police who took me back to the Bordersdal Building where I
had to give reasons why did I start to involve myself with the struggle
and which organisation am I working for and who am I working with. Those
are the kinds of questions that I was asked by

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	17	Z NELANI

the Security Police. My answer was people I have already served my
sentence. I was never told that now that I have been released from prison
I am going to be asked more questions. I have been sentenced already by
the Judge and I served my sentence and I am not prepared to answer
anymore questions. I do not want to answer questions that are going to
send me back to jail. If I had known at the time I could have asked
lawyers to please advise me.

MR SANDI: Now before I can interrupt you Mr Nelani, now by coming to the
Commission, Mr Nelani, you have what kind of wishes?

MR NELANI: I would like the Commission to please make means so that
though all those people cannot come forward so that they can account for
all those things that they did and again I would like to advise our
Government. All those people who use to violate our human rights must
resign.

MR SANDI: Thank you Mr Nelani. Thank you Chair.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Sir. Order please. Can we have order please. Are
there any questions?

DR MGOJO: There is just one question.

CHAIRPERSON: Dr Mgojo.

DR MGOJO: Mr Nelani, I can see that you are, you have undergone quite
severe ill treatment in your life. The men that you are talking about,
have you seen them again after your release? What do you talk about, when
you see them how do you feel and what do they say to you?

MR NELANI: When I see them I do greet them especially this Martin Neba.
He was being beaten up by one man here in the streets of Umtata, but I
try to defend for him, I defended him. I did defend him. The other one
that I have not seen is this Lavisa.

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



	18	Z NELANI

DR MGOJO: In your view, after you have been ill-treated by these men and
again you can still defend him. What do you think that they may help, do
you think that makes you feel?

MR NELANI: I was not fighting against them personally, I was fighting
against the system. They were just tools being used by the system.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Sir. Thank you for the statement that you have
brought forward to us. We also want to thank you to know that these
pamphlets that we use to pick up here to know where they come from
because we use to just see the pamphlets and we did not know who was
responsible for them. We realise that from your village, it looks like
your village has more heros. We are grateful to have men like you. We
also hope that the things that you have put forward to the TRC, we are
going to look at them quite closely especially those that we have powers
that we can take them to the Government. We hope that the Government will
also take a closer look at them.

	Now before you can step down I would like to announce that the people
that I think that are the most important in this hall, the witnesses who
came forward to the Commission coming from the rural areas just around
Umtata and around Transkei as a whole, the time now for them has come for
them to go back to relax in their own homes. We are going to continue
with the hearings, but I would like to show respect to them. We must all
stand when they go out. We ask the Lord to please go with them, accompany
them, protect them on the road until they get into their homes safe and
well. To show respect to them when they leave can we all please stand.
Thank you. Can you can all sit now.

	------------------------------

UMTATA HEARING	EASTERN CAPE PROVINCE



