
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	13-05-1997	

NAME:	RHYLINE NENE

		N.N.G. MADIKANE

CASE: 	KING WILLIAM'S TOWN

DAY 2

__________________________________

CHAIRMAN:	We will now call Rhyline Nene, Nonkululeko Nonyaniso Gladys
Madikane.

RHYLINE NENE:	(sworn states)

NONKULULEKO NONYANISO GLADYS MADIKANE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Mr Chairperson, they have been properly sworn in.

CHAIRMAN:	Tiny Maya?

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mrs Nene, let me start with you. You
are here today to tell us about your husband, Mr Steven Nene. You are
going to tell what happened in 1990 immediately after Oupa Gqozo had
taken over the rule of the Ciskei. Can you please tell us what happened
to your husband?

MS NENE:	First of all I would like to greet the Chairperson of the
Commission, members of the Commission and everybody here. Secondly I
would like to thank the opportunity to come here and give details about
what happened to my husband.

	I am requesting to start in 1989 about what happened to me in 1989. My
house was burnt down. My husband was a Councillor in Mdantsane at the
time. Secondly in 1989 when Gqozo had taken over, my shop was also burnt
down.

	Everything inside the shop was burnt down, even today I was not able to
build the shop again. Thirdly, the police of Mr Gqozo came to my house in
Frankfort. They were driving a kombi, a cream, white kombi.

	I thought that they just came in the hotel. At the time my husband was
about to have tea as he was coming from the field.

	These people said that Mr Nene, we are here to take you. He asked them
who are you. They said that we are from the government, we have been sent
to take you because there is something that was needed from you.

MS MAYA:	Excuse me Ma'am. Let us go back to 1989. You said that your
house was burnt down and your shop was burnt down. Why was this happening
to you? Who burnt down your house and your shop?

MS NENE:	It was at a time of consumer boycott. If you belonged to a
certain party, your house would be burnt down. I think that my house was
burnt down because my husband was a Councillor.

MS MAYA:	Please continue Ma'am.

MS NENE:	I think our house was burnt down because my husband was a
Councillor.

MS MAYA:	Did you know the people who did this?

MS NENE:	No, we did not know them. We did not even know the people who
burnt down the shop because it was on the day when Gqozo had taken over
the rule of Ciskei when our shop was burnt down.

MS MAYA:	Please continue Ma'am with your story.

MS NENE:	The police came. I asked them why are you looking for my
husband. They said that they had been sent to fetch him, they did not
know why.

	I asked whether I can accompany him with his car, they said no, they are
going to take him with their kombi. They told me not to go with them.
They then left me behind.

	Because I was scared, I forgot to take the number plate of the car. I
just thought that maybe they were going to kill him. I phoned my son in
Mdantsane. He arrived, we then went to the police to report this. The
police told us that he was not there and there is nothing they can do.
They told us to go and search for him in other police stations.

	We went to Qasa police station, Zwelitsha police station, Tamara. A week
passed. After a second week I saw my son arriving at home. He said that
my husband was in Cecilia Makiwane. One nurse phoned him, this nurse said
that my husband arrived there with the police.

	He was in Cecilia Makiwane. We then went to visit him in hospital. When
we arrived there his condition was very bad. We could not even talk to
him. We came back the following day.

	I found out that in that private ward there was a red flag. I asked the
sister what was that flag for, the sister told me that Ma'am, this is
because your husband's Doctor was there, but every Doctor has to go
inside and check or examine him.

MS MAYA:	Excuse me Mrs Nene, how old was your husband at this time?

MS NENE:	In 1990 - he was born in 1924.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Ma'am, you may continue.

MS NENE:	We then visited him every time. After three days he regained
consciousness, he could identify us but he could not do anything for
himself.

	The Doctors would come and take him to an X-ray. We then realised that
he, when we visited him, he would tell us that the police are on their
way and the police would arrive. One of them was Mr Funani. I don't
remember the other police, but I can identify them if I can see them.

MS MAYA:	Where was he stationed?

MS NENE:	He was a police under Gqozo.

MS MAYA:	In which station?

MS NENE:	No, I don't know. I don't want to lie, because I don't know. I
think he was in Zwelitsha or Mdantsane.

MS MAYA:	For how long did your husband stay in hospital?

MS NENE:	He stayed for three weeks.

MS MAYA:	How was he injured?

MS NENE:	He was injured very badly.

MS MAYA:	Where?

MS NENE:	He was injured in his head. Even today he is mentally impaired.

MS MAYA:	Did you get details or explanations of how he got injured?

MS NENE:	Before he was discharged, as we were visiting him, there was a
police guard in his ward. But we could see that this police was feeling
something towards my husband. He said that Mxolisi, under your fathers
bed there is a machine, this machine belonged to the men who used to
visit him.

	He was always restless as we were visiting him. Even if we were talking
to him, he would not respond to what we were saying. We then asked him
what happened to him. He said he cannot tell us because he did not know
what happened to him. The only thing he knew was that while he was in
Tamara, he was taken to certain places at night - they would put
something, a sail or a sack in his head.

	But what he remembered was that he was in Tamara where he was assaulted
there. He did not remember anything else. He said that the police would
take his head to the toilet and they would flush the toilet, which
rendered him unconscious.

	He said that he woke up in the hospital, he did not know who took him to
the hospital.

MS MAYA:	The Mr Funani you mentioned, was he in Tamara?

MS NENE:	I don't know where he was, but all the time he was together with
these police. Even when they visited my husband in hospital, he would be
with these police.

MS MAYA:	What was the main reason for this assault, what were they
looking for?

MS NENE:	He said that the day when they released him, Mr Funani said that
Ma'am, I am happy because you are here, because you are here to take your
husband home.

	I asked him what really happened, Mr Funani said your husband was
allegedly in contact with Sebe, that is why they were interrogating him,
they wanted to know their conversations with Sebe.

	He then told us that that was a wrong information.

MS MAYA:	Was there a reason for them to accuse him of this, was he a
friend of Mr Sebe?

MS NENE:	He was close with Mr Sebe because he was a member of SINIP and
he was a Councillor at that time.

MS MAYA:	The people who came to release him, did they tell you who
ordered them to release him?

MS NENE:	They said that Gqozo ordered his release.

MS MAYA:	How was your husband's health affected by this?

MS NENE:	I told my son to take a photograph of him, I thought that I
would be having a photograph with me now because my husband's death
touches me because ever since 1990, he is receiving treatment in
hospital. Doctor Van Niekerk told me that we have been to Humansdorp and
everywhere, he is in bed all the time.

	He suffered from a stroke because of that Dr Copperwitz who is treating
him now, said that my husband is not supposed to be in hospital, he is
supposed to go to Chiasma because of his condition.

	In December he was discharged from Chiasma, because he suffers from
strokes now and again. Before he was treated by Dr Copperwitz, I took him
myself, but because he was mentally disturbed, I had to take him to a
Psychiatrist.

	I was told that he had to be taken to St Dominique's and in St
Dominique's I paid R1 500-00 for a brain scan. He's got a poor health, he
cannot do anything for himself. I thought I would bring his photograph so
that you can see his condition from 1`990.

MS MAYA:	Ma'am, you said that you had businesses. Did you loose all your
businesses because of his health?

MS NENE:	Not only our businesses were destroyed, but my health was also
damaged because in 1994 I had a heart attack.

	I used to feel a pain but when I visited a Doctor, they would tell me
that I have pneumonia. I was then attacked. I had a heart attack in 1994.
I was in hospital in ICU for eight days. I am receiving medical
treatment, even yesterday I was in hospital to get my treatment.

	Because of my husband's health, we don't have any money left.

MS MAYA:	Ma'am, are there any other members of SINIP or Councillors that
were treated like your husband by the government?

MS NENE:	Yes, there are other members because their houses were burnt
down at that time.

MS MAYA:	Do you know their names?

MS NENE:	Mr Danana is one of them. I forgot the others, but there are
quite a lot.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Ma'am. Do you have expectations or requests to the
Commission?

MS NENE:	I would like to be helped with medical costs of my husband
especially I had to be paid a lot of money. Every month he has got to go
to Dr Copperwitz in East London for medical treatment.

	Dr Copperwitz, his treatment is not less than R300-00 every month. I was
supposed to go to Cape Town to undergo an operation but they told me that
I had to pay R60 000-00. MS MAYA:	A heart operation?

MS NENE:	Yes, a heart operation.

MS MAYA:	In other words you would like to be helped with medical costs?

MS NENE:	Yes. Myself and my husband.

MS MAYA:	Is that all Ma'am?

MS NENE:	I would also like to be helped with my shop. I cannot afford
because of my husband's health.

MS MAYA:	Do you receive any grants from the government?

MS NENE:	No, we've been trying for a long time, but with no success.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Ma'am. I will hand over to the Chairperson after I've
finished with both of you.

	Mrs Madikane, your story is also about your husband, Mr Carrington
Mcoseleli Madikane who was murdered on the 12th of August, 1992, in your
home, is that correct?

MS MADIKANE:	Yes, that is correct.

MS MAYA:	You say that your husband was a member of ADM and also a
Headman, is that correct?

MS MADIKANE:	Yes, that is correct.

MS MAYA:	You are going to talk about two incidents. The first one that
happened on the 16th of November 1991 and the one I've just mentioned.
Please tell us briefly Ma'am, about your husband.

MS MADIKANE:	Thank you. In November 1991 it was on the 16th, my husband
went to town. I waited for him to come back, but he did not arrive. At
about twelve o'clock midnight, I saw two vans arriving at home.

	These people asked me where my husband was, I told them that he went to
town. They said that he had been shot. They gave me his watch. I did not
believe them, so I asked them whether he was still alive. They said that
he was taken to Mount Coke hospital. In the morning I went to visit him
in Mount Coke hospital.

	He was still alive, he said that he did not know the perpetrators. He
said that he was shot in the hand and he was bitten in the hand and in
his shoulder. He was transferred to Cecilia Makiwane hospital. He then
recovered, he came back home.

	On the 12th of August 1992 at about nine o'clock in the evening, we were
sleeping at home. The children were playing in the kitchen. We heard
children crying, coming towards the bedroom, saying that someone wanted
to kill them.

	This person was following them to the bedroom. He asked where my husband
was. I said that he was not here, he was sleeping in his bed and I was
sleeping in mine.

	He then shot at us. He shot at him, he died on the spot. I went to take
a candle from another room. He went to take a candle from another room,
he lit the candle and he made sure that he was dead. After that he left.

MS MAYA:	Did you see this person, Ma'am?

MS MADIKANE:	Yes, I saw him but he had a balaclava on. I could just see
his eyes.

MS MAYA:	Was he alone?

MS MADIKANE:	Yes, he was alone.

MS MAYA:	Did you know who the person was?

MS MADIKANE:	No, we did not know.

MS MAYA:	Was there an investigation done by the police?

MS MADIKANE:	No, but the Detectives just came and they wanted us to give
them a statement. Nothing happened after that.

MS MAYA:	Are you from Qhugqwa?

MS MADIKANE:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	What was happening in the township at that time, what was the
condition?

MS MADIKANE:	It was this thing about the different organisations.

MS MAYA:	As he was a member of ADM, which other organisations was there?

MS MADIKANE:	It was the ANC.

MS MAYA:	What happened before, were there any other incidents that may
have led to his death?

MS MADIKANE:	I don't know because other people who died, were from the
ANC, that is all I know.

MS MAYA:	Is that all your story Ma'am?

MS MADIKANE:	Yes, that is all.

MS MAYA:	What would you like the Commission to do for you, what are your
requests?

MS MADIKANE:	I would like the Commission to help me because since my
husband's death, there is nobody supporting us. I've got children and I
am suffering a lot.

MS MAYA:	How old was your husband at this time, if you remember?

MS MADIKANE:	He was born in 1927, he died in 1992.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Ma'am, is that all you wanted to tell us today?

MS MADIKANE:	Yes, that is all.

MS MAYA:	I will now hand over to the Chairperson, thank you.

CHAIRMAN:	Mr Sandi?

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Let me ask Mrs Madikane, were you
supported by the leader of the ADM or by the members of the ADM?

MS MADIKANE:	No. There was no support from them.

ADV SANDI:	Was there any support by the ADM leader or by the ADM members
to the members of the ADM who were involved in such incidents?

MS MADIKANE:	He was the first person, nobody helped us.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRMAN:	Revd Xundu?

REVD XUNDU:	Mrs Nene, why were these people from the government, why were
they accusing you, why were they accusing your husband of contacting Mr
Sebe?

MS NENE:	Can you please repeat sir?

REVD XUNDU:	I was saying Ma'am, these people from the Gqozo government
who came to ask for the whereabouts of Mr Sebe, why did they come to your
husband? Was there any connection between your husband and Mr Sebe? Why
did they think that your husband would know the whereabouts of Mr Sebe?

MS NENE:	They were not asking him where he was, they were saying that
there is information that he is in contact with Mr Sebe. This is what we
want to know, because we just heard that he was in Pretoria, there were
no telephonic contact with him.

REVD XUNDU:	Were they friends with each other?

MS NENE:	Except for that he was a Councillor, he would attend a meeting
with them.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Ma'am.

CHAIRMAN:	Mrs Nene, I also want to ask you a question. You said that this
happened after the coup of 1990. Do you remember that after the coup
properties of people were burnt down, especially in the townships.

	Because businesses were burnt down. You said this incident happened
during that time?

MS NENE:	Yes. It happened during that time.

CHAIRMAN:	If I remember very well, this was done by people who called
themselves comrades. I don't know whether there were also criminals
amongst those comrades.

	Your case, your incident happened because of the Ciskeian police?

MS NENE:	Yes.

CHAIRMAN:	You said that Mr Funani was amongst these police?

MS NENE:	Yes.

CHAIRMAN:	We thank both of you. You've given us two different stories,
but two very painful stories because a pain is not a pain only in one
organisation, it is a pain to everybody.

	As a Commission we have to listen to all the people's stories and
investigate. We thank you for coming here and telling us your stories. We
will investigate them.

	Mrs Madikane's story is very clear because at that time ADM members were
in conflict with ANC members. We would like to investigate Mrs Nene's
story, we will try to contact Mr Funani so that he can tell us what was
happening at that time.

	I was not aware of such incidents done by the Ciskeian police. We thank
both of you, you may now sit down.

	--------------------

