TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	12 MAY 1997

NAME: 	NOMBUYISELO NTSIBA NGECE

		MTHETHO NGECE

CASE:	EC0726/96CCK	-	KING WILLIAM'S TOWN

DAY:		1

____________________________________________________________________

REV XUNDU: The witness is in Mr Chairperson. Nombuyiselo Ntsiba Ngece,
will you please get up?

NOMBUYISELO NTSIBA NGECE: (Duly sworn, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you.

MTHETHO NGECE: (Duly sworn, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you. Mr Chairperson, they have been properly sworn in.

CHAIRPERSON: Advocate Sandi will lead evidence on behalf of the
Commission.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Will you please come closer to the
mike. When you speak please come closer to the mike so that we can hear
you. You are going to talk about an incident of 1992 in Alice?

MRS NGECE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Could you tell us what happened, what happened in February
1992.

MRS NGECE: On the 15th of October 1992 people knocked at my door.
Nokuzola opened. They asked Nokuzola where Mthetho was. They said the
last time they saw him, Nokuzola responded saying that the last time she
saw him he had gone to the march in Bisho. Then the other brother emerged
and they thought that it was Mthetho. They asked who he was with.
Nokuzola said he was with the wife and child. As my husband opened the
door they asked for Mthetho. My husband said he does not know where
Mthetho was. When he said he does not know where Mthetho was there was a
bang on both windows. There was smoke. When I started screaming after a
lot of, we heard a lot of bangs I saw blood on myself. When I started
crying my husband said I must hide behind the door. I do not know what
else he said, but he fell on the ground. The house was burnt.

CHAIRPERSON: We will give Mthetho a chance to talk as you maybe drink a
glass of water mam.

INTERPRETER: The speaker's mike is not on.

ADV SANDI: Are you the one that the police were looking for that day?

MR NGECE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Where were you?

MR NGECE: I was at work in Fort Hare.

ADV SANDI: Were you working at Fort Hare?

MR NGECE: Yes, I still work there.

ADV SANDI: Who are these soldiers that came to your house?

MR NGECE: It was on Wednesday, 15th of October. First of all, a white
car, in the afternoon drove past, it was at about midday. It was a car
that was probably wanting to find out what is happening at my house.
Mbulelo, who is the last born at home, when he saw the car he went and
told my mother. My mother said Mbulelo should go and find out what this
car is all about, because it is because of these cars that my child no
longer stays at home. Mbulelo went, but he could not write down the
registration number. When I asked Nokuzola if she remembered the faces of
these people. Mbulelo was going to write matric. Nokuzola thought that
Mbulelo had been studying and had gone home late. The reason why she
opened is the door is because they called all my names, even my
nicknames. It was clear that these people knew me well.

ADV SANDI: Apparently they went inside the house?

MR NGECE: Yes, after Nokuzola had opened the door, they went in. They had
masks on. They asked who is in the one room. She said it is my brother.
They then said she had told them that I was not there. She then explained
that it was another brother. They went to my room. They found my brother
and they shot.

	There is a door that leads to the kitchen from the back. Our bedrooms
are aligned together. Nosipho had a one month old baby. My
sister-in-law's child was two months old. When she realised that there
was blood splattered all over her she was not sure whether it is her
husband's or her child's. As she screamed and cried out, she ran to my
father. My father took her into his room. The house was on fire by that
time. When we said that it, the whole family was out there, they threw a
hand grenade onto the house. They did not realise that my brother had
died. They thought he was just laying there. The people from the village
came. My father was trying to stop the fire. My father slipped and fell.
I am sure that my father's death is due to the injuries that he sustained
at that time. The next morning a car was hired to take all the injured.

ADV SANDI: Who were the injured?

MR NGECE: Nosipho was shot in the knee. Nokuzola, who had opened the
door, as she tried to jump out of the window she injured herself at the
back. She has got a big scar. They also shot her at the shoulder. My
niece was shot in her hand. Then my sister-in-law was shot in the arm and
the stomach. Also Elby was taken to the hospital. My youngest brother
came to tell me that our house had been burnt down. When I asked what had
happened he just said we must go. We got into the car. When we got to the
ANC offices everybody from Msobomvu was there. My father was there as
well. I was then told that my brother had passed away. If I had the
strength at that time and I knew who the perpetrators were I would have
gone and revenged, because my family is as it is, because of them. These
people know who they are.

	We then left for the hospital. When we got there we saw my
sister-in-law. I knew by then that my brother had died. I did not want to
see my sister-in-law, because she was going to ask where my brother is.
She asked as I thought. I told her that he was in another room in another
hospital room. She heard two days later that he had passed away. I
reported the case at the police. They hardly took notice of me, really.
When I got home there were police taking photographs.

ADV SANDI: Mthetho, why were these soldiers looking for you?

MR NGECE: Mr Chairperson, I think that it is because I was the Secretary
of SANCO, also the Chairperson of the Youth League. Before all that
whenever there was a political incident in Msobomvu the police would
arrest me. The police, whilst I was detained, would try to look for
evidence to link me to whatever incident. Then they would not find any
evidence and they would then take me back home. Therefore, I do not know,
that particular time, why they were looking for me.

ADV SANDI: Before this while incident was there political unrest in your
village?

MR NGECE: The police would come when we have meetings, coming to disrupt
the meetings. I do not remember anything else.

ADV SANDI: Were peoples' houses burnt down or was yours the first house
to be burnt down?

MR NGECE: Mine was the first.

ADV SANDI: Would the soldiers have any contribution in disrupting
people's meetings?

MR NGECE: The soldiers at that time would go to Msobomvu. They would camp
in one particular field with their trucks.

ADV SANDI: How did the soldiers relate to the people? How was their
relationship between the soldiers and the members of the community?

MR NGECE: There was disharmony. The thing is the soldiers, if they would
come across you at night or in the evening, they would attack you.

ADV SANDI: Are there soldiers or police that you know of that contributed
to this damage in your village?

MR NGECE: Yes, since 1992 to 1995 the case has been investigated. Mr
Galane, private investigators were investigating the whole case. There is
someone in the community, Dansda. My sister came to me saying that Dansda
had bought me expensive boots and jersey. I asked why. I asked my sister
if my sister-in-law, if she owed him anything and why he had bought these
things for her. My sister-in-law tried to find out why it is that Dansda
had bought me these things. The police went to Mr Dansda. Mr Dansda said
that he knew exactly who it was that was involved because he was part of
the planning. He did not list these people, but in Mr Galane's
investigation there is a soldier, Mr Tsanda, who is in King, who said
that he had come across Madoda Kula and Madoda Kula said that they had a
mission to accomplish in Msobomvu and I was the first person that they
were going to beat up. Therefore, Mr Kula was one of the soldiers that
were there.

ADV SANDI: Mr Tsanda said this. Is Mr Tsanda a police?

MR NGECE: He is a soldier. He said that he could not go. The answer came
the following day and there was a report that they had completed their
job and then he started being harassed.

ADV SANDI: Who said that?

MR NGECE: Madoda Kula.

ADV SANDI: Where is he? Do you know him?

MR NGECE: Yes, I know him.

ADV SANDI: Is he here in the hall?

MR NGECE: Yes, he is here. There he is.

ADV SANDI: Is that all the evidence you have?

MR NGECE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Can we go back to Mrs Ngece. Mam, were you able to identify
the perpetrators?

MRS NGECE: No.

ADV SANDI: Were they masked?

MRS NGECE: I was sleeping. I just heard a voice.

ADV SANDI: Did you recognise any voices?

MRS NGECE: No.

ADV SANDI: After a while, did you find out who it was that had done this?

MRS NGECE: Mr Galane came to us saying that he was investigating a
Dimbasa case and light came to our case as well. Three people, Madoda
Kula, Sandile Mati and Welcome Maronono.

ADV SANDI: Did he question these people or interrogate them?

MRS NGECE: There was a case and the, with the three of them, but the case
kept on being postponed.

ADV SANDI: Has the case been concluded?

MRS NGECE: The case was withdrawn, because, apparently, Nokuzola who had
opened the door, said that she could not identify the people, but she
could identify Sandile Mati?

ADV SANDI: Could she identify anybody else?

MRS NGECE: No.

ADV SANDI: Where was she identifying these people?

MRS NGECE: She was called to a parade.

ADV SANDI: Is there something else that you would like to talk about?
Nombuyiselo, is there something else, mam?

MRS NGECE: No, if he continued with the story then it is alright.

ADV SANDI: What is this story about somebody buying you a jersey? Who is
it?

MRS NGECE: It was Dansda.

ADV SANDI: Was he the one who bought you the boots and the jersey?

MRS NGECE: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Who is Dansda?

MRS NGECE: I thought that he had bought me the jersey because we have the
same clan name.

ADV SANDI: Is he a policeman or a soldier?

MRS NGECE: No.

ADV SANDI: Did Tsanda mention Dansda's name at all?

MRS NGECE: No.

ADV SANDI: So it is not related at all?

MRS NGECE: No.

ADV SANDI: Do you have requests before the Commission?

MRS NGECE: Yes, we have requests

ADV SANDI: Please go ahead.

MRS NGECE: First of all, I request that the Commission investigates this
matter fully. We would like the perpetrators to divulge everything and
let the justice take its course. If I say I forgive these people, I would
just be saying it. I cannot forgive these people. My child asked day and
night where her father is. I cannot forgive them. They are with their
children. Sometimes Kayda points at men, at other men, strangers saying
that it is her father.

ADV SANDI: How old is Kayda?

MRS NGECE: She is seven years old.

ADV SANDI: Is that all the evidence we have?

MR NGECE: I am going to agree with my sister-in-law. I have no
forgiveness for these people. I hope that one day, whenever that is, they
come before the Commission. When people look at me in the streets they
conclude that I am a criminal. We had my brother killed. There is no
peace in my heart. These people in the community look at me and they
laugh. These people, if the Commission finds these people I request that
these people be jailed all their lives. I never want to see them again.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson, I am handing over to you.

CHAIRPERSON: Are there any questions? Sorry, Mr Ngece, did this incident
occur the same day as the "Buddy" incident in the village?

MR NGECE: Yes, it was the same day.

CHAIRPERSON: Were there two groups attacking the two homes or was it the
same group?

MR NGECE: It was two groups.

CHAIRPERSON: Is it Mr Galana or Galena?

MR NGECE: It is Mr Galena.

CHAIRPERSON: Was he investigating this case?

MR NGECE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Until it was taken to court?

MR NGECE: Yes. No, the case would be postponed now and again. They would
promise that the case would be taken to the Regional Court, but that
never happened until it was withdrawn.

CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, Mr Galane, will, sort of, give us a lead?

MR NGECE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: There is a Mr Dansda who claims that he knows all the people
who were involved. How was he involved, was he one of these people?

MR NGECE: I do not know sir, because Mr Dansda was not working at the
time, but before that he was working in Transkei with Lizo Lomzie. He
stayed in Msobomvu. He said that I must go to him, because he has got all
the information.

CHAIRPERSON: These people that you have mentioned in your statement,
maybe Nombuyiselo can answer this question, because it is her statement.
Madoda Kula, Welcome Maronono, Sandile Mati, these three people you did
not see them on that day?

MRS NGECE: No.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Dansda told you?

MRS NGECE: No Galane told us.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. There is Madoda Kula here with his advocate. They
want to dispute some of the things that are in the statement.

	------------------------------





