	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION






	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	26.07.1996		NAME: NDWAWI LINAH NGQABAYE

CASE: 			 SOWETO

DAY 5

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma, are you able to hear me? Okay. When you want to talk
you can just press the red button and when you are finished you can just
press the grey one.

	Before you begin, I would like to ask you to take the oath. Will you
stand please, Mamma.

NDWAWI LINA NGQABAYE: (Duly sworn, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mamma, you may be seated. Mamma, as is our
practice we have assigned a Commissioner to assist you with the telling
of your story. Mr Hugh Lewin, this Commissioner on my right-hand side
will help you to tell your story.

MR LEWIN: Thank you, Madam Chair. Morning, Mamma. Thank you very much for
coming to join us. I am sorry we can't make it any warmer. I think even
the person who you mention in your story, who is now our President,
couldn't do much about the weather, but it is significant that we are
hearing your story, I think, in this place, in Regina Mundy. You talk in
fact about another place in Johannesburg where the incident that you will
tell us about, took place. It takes us right back to the beginning of the
beginnings of the Sixties and the beginnings of the time period which is
covered by the Commission. We are very grateful to you for having come to
tell us that story, and we would like to ask

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	N L NGQABAYE

you please, in your own time, and as relaxed as you like, please to tell
us. Thank you.

MRS NGQABAYE: What brings me here, I got a few women, the women who were
waiting there, they were waiting for those who were arrested like Mandela
and others. As we were there they arrived. They came in a vehicle, in a
big vehicle. I cannot describe this vehicle in any way. They arrived and
were led in. There was no gate so they could not lock or shut any gate.
We got inside also and as we were getting inside, policemen came out. I
don't know how many they were. They had those sjamboks that they were
hitting us with.

	I had clothes for the other prisoners who were in jail. I didn't know
where to take the clothes. One of the people I knew, he took those
clothes. He took us to the - he was taking them to the Africa House so
that he can see the doctors. We were given the wrapping stuff and the
tablets. When I realised that I was beaten, it was on my back. Even now I
can't breathe properly. I must always speak softly, always holding my
breath. As from then I was not healthy. I am not healthy.

	In 1976 during a funeral of a child who was shot by police, when we were
on the way to the funeral, when we were in Klip Town, we decided to walk,
we were hiking, until we reached the place of the funeral. While we were
washing our hands there were checkers. I couldn't see, I was confused. I
saw people holding me and pouring water over my body.

	The following day I was going to (indistint) place where I got help,
because of my eyes, and I could get some spectacles. I got them because I
am old-aged and my other eye cannot see properly, my right eye cannot see
properly. SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	N L NGQABAYE

There is nothing else that took place.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much, Mamma.

	Could I just ask, take you back to the first incident where you saw the
prisoners in the van, in the police van, I assume it was. Can you tell us
where that was?

MRS NGQABAYE: It was in the Drill Hall.

MR LEWIN: You mention that you can't quite remember the date. I think it
must have been - sorry?

MRS NGQABAYE: I can't remember the date because that was long ago.

MR LEWIN: I think from your account, what it must have been was the
arrival at the Drill Hall of the treason trialists, so that must have
been probably at the end of the treason trial in 1961. Do you think that
is about the time?

MRS NGQABAYE: No, it was not the end, it was the beginning. It was the
beginning, it was not the end of their case, it was the beginning of the
case.

MR LEWIN: Okay, that would make it even earlier. Thank you very much. And
then could I just ask about the police. When they came with their
sjamboks and they were beating you, were you with any of the others, can
you remember any of the people that were with you?

MRS NGQABAYE: I can't remember. The only person that I knew, because from
Orlando East I was the only one. The only person that I knew is Lian
Gooley, the late Lian Gooley.

MR LEWIN: Lian Gooley, thank you, yes. Did the police give any warning
before they came forward and hit you? Did they give any reason for
wanting to hit you?

MRS NGQABAYE: We were not told. There was, they just instructed us to go
out. When we resisted, because we

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	N L NGQABAYE

wanted to get inside the court, they didn't ask anything, they beat us.

MR LEWIN: Now if I could take you to what we as a Commission might be
able to do to assist you. Could you tell us how we as a Commission might
be able to help.

MRS NGQABAYE: I said initially that I don't know what can I ask for,
because what I wanted to say here, I also want to contribute about the
things that took place in the past.

MR LEWIN: That you certainly have done. But we still feel that perhaps
there is something that we can do to help you, can you tell us?

MRS NGQABAYE: If the Commissioner can help me, I don't have any person
who is supporting me financially. I don't even have food, I have been
borrowing money to come to this place. I have nothing.

MR LEWIN: Thank you, Mamma. I think I will now pass back to the
Chairperson, Yasmin for other questions. Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mamma, I will ask the other Commissioners if they want to
ask you any questions.

MS MKHIZE: You told us that when they started beating you it was 1961,
when you were at the meeting in the Drill Hall. Maybe it also happened
again in 1976. The way you look at this thing, when the police severely
beat you was during the first instance or the last one?

MRS NGQABAYE: The severe beatings that they were hitting me was the first
beating. I couldn't even remember when they were asking me. I couldn't
even remember whether it was 1961. I can't remember the time.

MS MKHIZE: I don't even know whether they were doing this because we were
women, but I know that they were beating us so that we must move away
from the prisoners, because we

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	N L NGQABAYE

wanted to go straight to the people who were arrested and to hear what is
happening.

MRS NGQABAYE: My eyes were - it is because of the tear gas.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you, Mamma.

MS SOOKA: Glenda? Mamma, thank you for coming to us to tell your story.
You are one of the oldest people and it is quite clear that right from
the beginning of our history, people like yourself have been the subject
of beatings and abuse. We are very proud to have you here. You have been
one of our, I think, oldest witnesses and you have come to tell us about
the time which is remembered greatly in our history. We have heard what
you have said in terms of your own needs. We have taken note of them. We
will see where we can assist you in that regard. Thank you very much for
coming to share your story.



	------------





























SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

