	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	NOMBULELO NGUBO		

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:	Mrs Nombulelo, we welcome you. We will hand over to Reverend
Xundu to swear you in.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

NOMBULELO NGUBO:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Ma'am.

REVD FINCA:	We will hand over to June Crichton who is going to lead
evidence.

MS CRICHTON:	Good morning Mrs Ngubo. Are you the sister of Sindile
vincent Ngubo?

MS NGUBO:	Yes.

MS CRICHTON:	And you are the sister of Mzwandile Wellington Ngubo, who is
the deceased? And you are going to tell us about two incidents where your
house was burnt here in Cradock, is that correct?

MS NGUBO:	Yes, Ma'am.

MS CRICHTON:	And I also understand that as a result of the burning of
your house, your mother when she heard the news from her hospital bed,
died, is that correct?

MS NGUBO:	Yes, Ma'am.

MS CRICHTON:	So this has been a very traumatic time for you. Before you
start, can you tell me what was the situation in the township that led up
to the first house burning and we will start with that in 1977? What was
the situation in the community?

MS NGUBO:	It was on a Monday morning, before this all

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	N NGUBO

started. My brother had gone to school, then Wellington came back after
eight o'clock. I asked him why he had come back, he said there is nobody
at school.

	I saw a group of children going to another school. I thought that maybe
there is a short break at the school. A little while after Wellington had
arrived, Vincent then came, my younger brother.

	He then asked for Wellington, because he said there are people here who
have come to burn him. I then warned him to hide either under the bed or
in the wardrobe. When I looked through the window, there was a whole
horde of people.

	He then ran away to our next door neighbours. Then a whole lot of
children asked for my brother, I said he is not here. Then they started
burning down the house, throwing everything around.

	There were three babies crawling in the house and others too. I forgot
the children. Mean while the older children had taken the crawling ones.
The little girl crawled towards the fire, then I helped another little
girl to go into the house, through the window, to take out the little
baby.

	I then became unconscious. The police came, White police. My cousin's
sister came, the police then asked us where we were going to go. My
cousin then said she would take us to her house. We went to Luxolweni,
the whole family.

	Mziwakhe left with the White men, the White police. After dinner, I had
to go to my mother in hospital. I slept, not having gone to the hospital,
because I was very tearful. I could not sleep really, I was kneeling
down. I heard a knock, I opened the door, it was Mziwakhe, the car

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	N NGUBO

had brought him in.

	I then said Mziwakhe must lie down next to the children. I asked
Mziwakhe what was going on, he said that he did not know, except that
Xoliswa said I am an informer. We slept.

	The next day we were taken by the police. These police were from Port
Elizabeth. We then gave in statements. A police van then took us to
Somerset East, there were a lot of children that had been released from
Cradock.

	They asked Mziwakhe if he knew the other children. He said yes, he did.
He then was asked to identify who had burnt his house down, he said he
did not know who it was.

	We came back from Somerset East, we never went to a court of law again.
In 1985, the week our leaders died, I heard in the 5 am news, I had a
premonition. By then Mziwakhe was working in Uitenhage.

	On the Saturday, there was a service at the Methodist Church for our
leaders. Mziwakhe came after dinner. I said to him he must go back home,
at least for a few hours before he goes back to Port Elizabeth. Mziwakhe
then went.

	I could not sleep that night. I just didn't feel well. At 1 am there was
a knock on the door. My son, who was about 10 years old, Sindile Ngubo
then came to the house, crying, saying that our house has been burnt down
yet again.

	I was shaking. The morning I went home. Our house was totally burnt
down. There were glasses and plates on the floor.

	I went to the police and I found him at the charge office. I asked what
was going on, he said that he just heard a petrol bomb in the dining
room. He then said he saw four men and then the fire just expanded to the
other rooms.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	N NGUBO

	I asked him what he was going to do, he said he would run away because
his wife was from Transkei, he said he would go to the Transkei.

	Then a friend of mine came. He said that we must go to the houses where
the Cradock Four were from. Go to each house to give sympathy and
reverence.

MS CRICHTON:	Is that all you have to say? Can I ask you some questions
now?

MS NGUBO:	Yes, Ma'am.

MS CRICHTON:	According to the statement that I have in front of me, after
the first incident, the family were re-accepted into the community, could
you tell us about that? After the 1977 burning, there was a re-acceptance
into the community, tell us about that?

MS NGUBO:	Yes, we were accepted again after 1977. No one went into prison
for having burnt down our house.

MS CRICHTON:	On the second occasion, was there any reason that you could
understand as to why the house was burnt again? What was the reason for
it in your opinion?

MS NGUBO:	The second time, well I don't know.

MS CRICHTON:	What was your brothers' involvement in the community? Were
they involved in any organisations at all?

MS NGUBO:	My brothers, we were all ANC members.

MS CRICHTON:	After the second incident, there was no court case, there
was no charge either laid? You didn't lay a charge?

MS NGUBO:	Yes, Ma'am, it is so, there was no court case.

MS CRICHTON:	What is the standing of the family in the community now?

MS NGUBO:	It is very peaceful.

MS CRICHTON:	When you came to this Commission, you came

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	N NGUBO

with thoughts in your mind, about what we can do for you. Can you tell us
what you feel you would like the Commission to assist you with?

MS NGUBO:	The reason why I came before the Commission, is because we do
not have a home, we stay in shacks. If the Commission could build us a
house please.

MS CRICHTON:	Your brother Vincent Ngubo, he is deceased?

MS NGUBO:	It is Wellington Ngubo.

MS CRICHTON:	I apologise, it is Wellington as it says here, but Sindile
and Mziwakhe is still with you?

MS NGUBO:	Sindile is alive, he is working.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you Ms Ngubo, I will hand you back to the Chairperson
and the panel now for questions.

REVD FINCA:	Tiny Maya?

MS MAYA:	I just want to ask a few questions Ma'am. You say that when your
house was burnt down, your brother came back from school. I have two
names here Mzwandile and Mziwakhe, who is Wellington?

MS NGUBO:	Wellington is Mziwakhe.

MS MAYA:	Do you also have a brother called Mzwandile?

MS NGUBO:	No, it is a mistake.

MS MAYA:	When he came back, what reasons did he give for coming back from
school?

MS NGUBO:	He said that there is no one at school, the students are not
there.

MS MAYA:	Did you know the reasons for that?

MS NGUBO:	I don't know.

MS MAYA:	You said that when your house was burnt down, he was taken by
White men in a van. Do you know the reason why he was taken separately
from you in a White man's police van and you travelled separately?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6	N NGUBO

MS NGUBO:	No, I don't know the reasons.

MS MAYA:	When he got home, did he give you any reasons?

MS NGUBO:	He said it was because he had been labelled an informer.

MS MAYA:	Is that the reason why you travelled separately from home?

MS NGUBO:	I don't know.

MS MAYA:	Were you, did you give statements together with him?

MS NGUBO:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	Do you know what he said in his own statement?

MS NGUBO:	No, I do not.

MS MAYA:	According to your knowledge, who is Xoliswa?

MS NGUBO:	Her surname is Ntombela.

MS MAYA:	Where is she now?

MS NGUBO:	She stays here in Cradock.

MS MAYA:	Is there any particular why Xoliswa would say your brother was
an informer?

MS NGUBO:	He didn't tell me anything about Xoliswa. That was it, he said
it was it.

MS MAYA:	And then the second time when your house was burnt down, where
was Mziwakhe because you said he arrived from somewhere?

MS NGUBO:	Well, he worked at Uitenhage. When our house was burnt the
first time, I left to work in Uitenhage. I then found a White man whom I
asked to look for a job for my brother. He then said I must phone my
brother so that he could come and work at Uitenhage.

	He then worked there from 1977 until our house was burnt down again.

MS MAYA:	So nothing happened during 1977 and 1985?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7	N NGUBO

MS NGUBO:	It was peaceful and Mziwakhe was not there. Mziwakhe left for
the Transkei after the second time.

MS MAYA:	Your house was burnt down after he had come back from Uitenhage?

MS NGUBO:	He was working at Uitenhage and he came back when our leaders
died. Our leaders died during the week, on the Saturday there was a
church service and then on Sunday evening, these four men who were
disguised, burnt our house down.

MS MAYA:	There was no reason that was given this time?

MS NGUBO:	No, there wasn't.

MS MAYA:	I have one last question. You say that police came with Mr
Maqina. Who is Mr Maqina?

MS NGUBO:	He was a Detective at the time.

MS MAYA:	Where is he now?

MS NGUBO:	I think he is at Queensdale.

MS MAYA:	Is he still a policeman?

MS NGUBO:	I don't know.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Ma'am.

REVD FINCA:	Reverend Xundu?

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. I just want to ask about the
Ntombela family. Was there any conflict between the two families, your
family and the Ntombela family?

MS NGUBO:	No, there was never a conflict. Even now, I greet Xoliswa when
I see her.

REVD FINCA:	Ntsiki Sandi?

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. What did Mziwakhe say about him being
accused by Xoliswa as an informer?

MS NGUBO:	He said to me that he was not an informer.

MR SANDI:	Were they at school together?

MS NGUBO:	No, Xoliswa was older than him. Xoliswa is my

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8	N NGUBO

age.

MR SANDI:	You say that you were taken by the police to the police station?

MS NGUBO:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	When you house was being burnt down in 1977, you said that
Mziwakhe was taken by the police?

MS NGUBO:		I had hidden him with our next door neighbours. When the
police came, I showed the police where he was, he was then taken in a
police van.

MR SANDI:	When he came back, what report did he give, where did the
police take him to?

MS NGUBO:	He said the police just asked him if he was an informer and he
said he was not.

MR SANDI:	Was it an ordinary thing that when something like this
happened, police from Port Elizabeth would come and not from Cradock?

MS NGUBO:	I don't know.

MR SANDI:	Is it normal that Port Elizabeth police would investigate such
a matter in stead of Cradock?

MS NGUBO:	It was the first time that I saw these Port Elizabeth policemen.

MR SANDI:	Did that shock you?

MS NGUBO:	Not really, because I was in too much shock.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Ma'am. Thank you Mr Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Mrs Ngubo, thank you. You have given us a picture that we are
clear about - during the struggle people burning down houses because they
were labelled informers. 	We remember that some people were given that
label sometimes because they had betrayed the struggle fighters. Some
were given this label for other reasons. Maybe you were at a meeting and
you did not agree with a certain

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9	N NGUBO

point, and then you would be labelled as an informer.

	Sometimes you would not agree with a certain person within the party,
and then you would be labelled as an informer.

	We realise that this was very painful. It is not our job as the
Commission to investigate whether the person was an informer or not. We
just leave that to the person's conscience.

	Our job is to look into the violation of people's rights by others. The
burning down of people's houses and people themselves and then we give a
proposal to the President.

	We thank you for having given us this story. Perhaps we will need more
information from you, we will send our investigators to get the details
that we do not have in our statement. In the mean time we just want to
say thank you to you.

	--------------------

