
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.11.96	NAME: NOMUSA NGWANDI

CASE: TEMBISA

__________________________________________________________

MS MKHIZE: We thank you and welcome back for the last part of our session
today. The first person we will call will be Nomusa Ngwandi. We welcome
you, we also see here that you are one of those who lost one of their
beloved ones.

NOMUSA NGWANDI: (sworn states)

MS MKHIZE: Can you tell us who is accompanying you?

MS NGWANDI: It is my neighbour.

MS MKHIZE: We also welcome you neighbour and we appreciate your unity in
these times. We will request one of the Commissioners to assist you in
giving your evidence and that will be Hugh Lewin.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much for coming and we are very pleased that you
could come. Please try and feel relaxed, I know it's not easy. What you
are going to tell us about took place not all that long ago in July 1993.
You are from Ntombeka Section here in Tembisa. If you could please, in
your words and in your own time, tell us about what happened to you and
your husband.

MS NGWANDI: In Tembeka where I am staying we had a gang called Toasters
in the community, which was harassing the community. After some time they
went to stay in Vusimuzi Hostel with Mr Mduze. There at the hostel they
collaborated with Inkatha. On 31 July 1993 whilst I was sitting at home
in the dining room I heard men talking outside saying wake up men.
Because there were patrols at that time, the comrades were patrolling,
trying to protect us against the

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	NGWANDI

Toasters. It went on, the gunshots and then I became concerned with all
these gunshots my husband hasn't arrived back at home from work. He went
to work accompanied by his cousin.

	Whilst I was sitting there I heard somebody in the dining room. I heard
the windows being broken in the dining room and then I thought it's the
Toasters again starting to attack people and stealing their belongings as
well. Time went on with all this gunfire going on. Thereafter all windows
were being broken down, the kitchen, the bedrooms as well, then I hid
next to the wardrobe. Then I tried to open a window to see what is
happening outside, then I saw some men who were carrying guns. They were
in a Casper. They were shooting relentlessly.

	It was round about 8:30 when my cousin arrived and I asked him where is
my husband? He took some time to tell me. He tried to hide something from
me. Then finally he told me that all this gunfire my husband was shot as
well. Then he left and he said he's going to cover him up with a blanket.

	Whilst he was away I tried to ask him to accompany me so that we can go
and fetch him because he saw him. When he came back round about 11
o'clock he said I must take a wheelbarrow and a blanket so that we must
go and fetch my husband. As we tried to go out we saw a Casper passing
through another road facing our house. Then I suggested that we should go
to this Casper and tell them that we are being attacked here in Ntombeka
Section. But before then there were more gunshots and then we went into a
nearby house. These men came back and passed by. We sat there until two
o'clock in the morning and then we decided to go

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	NGWANDI

back home.

	When we got home at 2 o'clock that morning, at 4 o'clock my aunt's child
came and told me that my husband had fallen at a new residence area and
he told me exactly how it happened.

	Thereafter I tried to contact the police so that they should be able to
help us. But when I phoned they gave me a different number to call,
Kempton Park, but Kempton Park they referred me to Rabasotho. We tried
further to make a few calls but to find that the phone was engaged until
we managed to phone through round about 8 o'clock the following morning.
	Thereafter I will tell you what led to this gang being called Toasters.

MR LEWIN: Can you tell us a little bit more about your own search for
your husband's body?

MS NGWANDI: I never went the following day to the place of the incident
where he was killed. My sister and neighbours went there.

MR LEWIN: Mrs Ngwandi you also mentioned that you have a daughter, one
daughter, or do you have more daughters, children?

MS NGWANDI: I have got two children.

MR LEWIN: And what was the effect on them of this incident?

MS NGWANDI: This disturbed them a great deal because their father was the
breadwinner, he was doing everything for us. But now at the moment I
cannot manage everything because I am unemployed.

MR LEWIN: Could you tell us how old they are the two daughters?

MS NGWANDI: They are 22 and 19 years of age.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	NGWANDI

MR LEWIN: So if you would like to tell us because we are trying to build
up information about this gang, if you could tell us how you think they
were operating and why and how they were made up.

MS NGWANDI: The Toasters are youth from Ntombeka Section. They are very
young for the things that they were doing. They decided to go and stay at
Vusimuzi Hostel. They decided to call themselves Toasters because there
was a child in the community who was a Toaster. They took this child and
put him inside hot oil and that's where the name originates from.

MR LEWIN: From the way you talk these were all young people from within
the community, does that mean that everybody knew them or knows them
still?

MS NGWANDI: Yes everybody knew them.

MR LEWIN: And the move into the hostel, why do you think that took place?

MS NGWANDI: As they were going on they decided to go and join Inkatha,
that's why they went to the hostels.

MR LEWIN: Do you think there was any link between that and the police,
SAP?

MS NGWANDI: Yes I would say that because they had a relation with the
police.

MR LEWIN: Why do you think the police were interested in having this
relationship?

MS NGWANDI: It is because whenever these boys were arrested they would be
discharged and you wouldn't know how they got that right.

MR LEWIN: So when they came to attack your house they were obviously
looking for your husband, they knew who you were and what your husband
did as part of the patrol group?

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	NGWANDI

MS NGWANDI: I think they knew because they knew everything that was
happening in Ntombeka, because from every household the men would come
and join the patrol. And my husband was one of the patrollers as well.

MR LEWIN: Were you at any stage able to identify any of the people who
were responsible for shooting your husband?

MS NGWANDI: I cannot say because my cousin told me a different statement
because I wanted to find out from him what happened on that day. He did
explain to me what happened that day.

MR LEWIN: Can you tell us what else happened that night? Was your husband
the only person who was killed or were other people killed that night?

MS NGWANDI: Many people were killed on that day and my uncle's child was
killed as well and he hid on the roof of the house and that's where a
couple was killed.

MR LEWIN: Was there any reason for this activity that particular night,
why do you think it happened that night only, or was it only that night?

MS NGWANDI: It was the first time it happened that night.

MR LEWIN: Thinking back on it which you must have done, and it's
obviously very painful to do so, can you think of any reason why it all
happened just that one night?

MS NGWANDI: I don't know.

MR LEWIN: Mrs Ngwandi thank you very much.

MS MKHIZE: We thank you very much and I will ask the other Commissioners
to ask you questions to clarify the issues.

MS SOOKA: Mrs Ngwandi from the information that we have it seems that at
least 30 people were killed that night, is that a correct number?

MS NGWANDI: Many people were killed on that day. Towards

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	NGWANDI

the BP Garage many people were killed on their way back from work and
some were even burnt there.

MS SOOKA: There also were residents who were saying that the police were
involved in that attack, do you know anything about that?

MS NGWANDI: It is so.

MS SOOKA: There are allegations that the police transported the attackers
into the open veld that separated the various sections, do you know
anything about that?

MS NGWANDI: Yes I know something about that.

MS SOOKA: Do you want to tell us?

MS NGWANDI: On this day of the 31st of July it was 6:30, my uncle's child
says she saw the Caspers dropping off people at the BP Garage and she
decided to run away. She thought that it was members of the ZCC
congregation but realised that there is something strange about them and
hid on top of the roof.

MS SOOKA: What did she see then?

MS NGWANDI: She saw these people who were shooting people and even in the
yard, in our yard, when they came in and they killed the servant there
and the husband.

MS SOOKA: There are also allegations that when the attacks stopped that
these people were picked up by the Caspers as well, has that been
confirmed by people you know?

MS NGWANDI: Can you repeat your question?

MS SOOKA: From the information we have people are also alleging that when
the attackers went back after the attack that the Caspers pick them up to
take them back to where they had come from.

MS NGWANDI: I would not confirm that because on that day there were many
Caspers in the Township.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	NGWANDI

MS SOOKA: And were the policemen from the Caspers, were

they intervening to separate the attackers from the residents or were
they participating in what was happening or did they simply stand by and
let people be killed? Who were they helping?

MS NGWANDI: The policemen were helping those people in the Township.

MS SOOKA: So they were saving them from the attack?

MS NGWANDI: I say the policemen were working hand-in-hand with these
people who were shooting randomly in the Township.

MS SOOKA: I see. There was also an allegation that the attackers were
shouting "bulala, bulala", is that correct, did you hear that?

MS NGWANDI: No, in my statement I said that since there was this
patrolling the comrades were saying wake up men, wake up men, and they
said that you must wake up so that you must join the patrol, that's what
the comrades meant.

MS SOOKA: You also said in your statement that you were attacked when you
tried to find your husband's body, do you want to tell me a little more
about that?

MS NGWANDI: As I have said earlier on that after the shooting I thought
that it was quiet, I asked our cousin to take a wheelbarrow and I will
take a blanket and we will go and fetch my husband where he saw the place
where he was shot and then we saw a Casper brightening our house and then
I suggested that we should go to this Casper and tell them that we are
being attacked at Ntombeka. But before we got that there were gunshots
and we left everything there, the wheelbarrow and the blanket and we hid
in a house that a caravan outside and that's when these men passed by and
they TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	NGWANDI

were looking for us, but they never found us. We only managed to go back
home at 2 o'clock because we could not go out.

MS SOOKA: Mrs Ngwandi I did say earlier on that there are some members of
the Toasters Gang that are going to apply for amnesty, how do you feel
about what would happen if they were to live with you in the community?

MS NGWANDI: I would forgive them because there is peace now.

MS SOOKA: Thank you very much.

MS SEROKE: Nomusa you said that your brother-in-law was in the company of
your husband, they were out from work, can you tell us exactly as to how
he described the incident to you?

MS NGWANDI: He told me that when they alighted at the BP Garage they
heard the gun sounds, and these were unusual sounds and they suspected
those were the young children who were patrolling the place. And he said
he's going to tell them he's not going to join the patrol today because
he is tired. They proceeded home. When they were about to reach the new
houses that were built next to Ntombeka they went through these men and
he told them that he won't be patrolling that day because he was tired,
he was from work. My cousin said he joined the people because they were
singing Usuthu, Usuthu slogans. These people who asked them were not
comrades. In order to save his life he joined them and continued the
activities of breaking other people's houses until later they discovered
that the men from work is back.

MS SEROKE: You can take your time and drink some water.

MS NGWANDI: That's what he told me when he arrived at

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	NGWANDI

home.

MS SEROKE: In other words they joined these men who were attacking
because they thought they were the patrollers?

MS NGWANDI: Yes that's true.

MS SEROKE: And they heard them sing Usuthu, Usuthu?

MS NGWANDI: Yes my husband heard them saying Usuthu.

MS SEROKE: And that's when they discovered this was the wrong gang?

MS NGWANDI: Yes that is true.

MS SEROKE: After your husband told them that he can't patrol it's now
that he was one of the patrollers?

MS NGWANDI: That's correct.

MS SEROKE: That's how they killed him?

MS NGWANDI: Yes.

MS SEROKE: Did your cousin explain as to how he was killed?

MS NGWANDI: Yes he did explain. I only discovered when they brought his
clothes home, on the front side, on the chest side the clothes were torn
and it shows there was a wound on the right side, and his pockets were
turned inside-out, which shows as if he has been robbed.

MS SEROKE: Can you tell us more about the name Usuthu?

MS NGWANDI: This is normally a slogan from the Zulu people.

MS SEROKE: Maybe I can ask you a question, this cousin of yours how did
he survive or escape the incident?

MS NGWANDI: He told me that he joined them and started to sing their
slogans and also get involved in the breaking of the windows of other
people's houses.

MS SEROKE: From what you heard your husband refused to do what they asked
him to do?

MS NGWANDI: No.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	NGWANDI

MS SEROKE: I also, as you know that as a Commission we are here to listen
and also to see what can be done to help people like you. As a person who
has made a statement what is it that you wish can be done that would
satisfy you?

MS NGWANDI: Can you repeat the question?

MS SEROKE: (tape ends....).... to help people who have been harassed or
who have suffered the consequences and yourself as you have given a
statement, what is it that you wish?

MS NGWANDI: The thing that can make me to reconcile is that I would like
to see the people, the perpetrators to come before and be identified and
known.

MS SEROKE: Thank you very much. Yours is a painful story and you are one
of the people who can be taken as an example of the women who have
suffered after having lost their husband or men without a reason. We
would also like to thank you, your spirit to say that they are gone but
they have opened us a way to live in peace today. One of the things that
you say, you said you would like to see the perpetrators come before the
people and explain. It is also a wish that the people like them come
before us, work together with us. As you know people reconcile and get to
rest if they know exactly what happened. We also invite all of them,
especially the perpetrators to stand up, come up and explain everything
as to what happened, and this is what we think can bring peace within the
community. Thank you.

	----------------

