	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	ERIC NJOBO

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:	We will now call upon Eric Njobo to come forward please. We
welcome you Mr Eric Njobo and we thank you for coming here today.

	I will hand over to Reverend Xundu to help you to take an oath after
that I will ask Tiny Maya to lead you with questions on behalf of the
Commission.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman.

ERIC NJOBO:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. He has been sworn in properly Mr Chairman.

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Chairman. I greet you Mr Njobo. In your statement
in front of us, we see that you are going to tell us about your son,
Andile Alfred Plaatjie, who was killed in 1986. Can you please explain to
us who was Andile?

MR NJOBO:	Andile is my son in this way - I married his mother, I am his
step-father.

MS MAYA:	Thank you sir. How old was Andile at the time of his death?

MR NJOBO:	He was 25 years old.

MS MAYA:	Was he working at the time?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, he was working.

MS MAYA:	Did he have a family?

MR NJOBO:	No, he did not have a family?

MS MAYA:	Did he have any children?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	E NJOBO

MR NJOBO:	No, he did not have any children.

MS MAYA:	In the community, what was he doing?

MR NJOBO:	He was working.

MS MAYA:	Was he a member of any community organisations or political
organisations?

MR NJOBO:	Yes.

MS MAYA:	At the time of his killing, do you know what was happening?

MR NJOBO:	No, I don't know, because I was sleeping in my house. Monde
came, Monde Nanxi came in the morning. He told me to go to his home with
him. We went there, when we arrived there, I saw my son sleeping in bed
and I asked if he was dead there, he was stabbed in the stomach.

	I asked what had happened and Monde told me they were coming from the
night vigil and the police came, but Monde ran away and he ran to the
neighbours house. I found my son in Monde's home and Monde told me that
they were being chased by the police the previous night.

MS MAYA:	In other words Monde saw who these people were?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, Monde knows everything.

MS MAYA:	According to your knowledge, did Monde identify any police?

MR NJOBO:	Monde is right here inn this room, he can explain that.

MS MAYA:	Maybe we can talk to Monde after we had spoken to you. At this
time, what was the situation in the community?

MR NJOBO:	Things were very bad in the community because police were all
over and we were tear gassed all the time. MS MAYA:	You said that you
found Andile sleeping in the bed and his intestines protruded from his
stomach? Can you please explain that?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	E NJOBO

MR NJOBO:	He was stabbed and I could see his intestines.

MS MAYA:	According to your knowledge, at that time the police used to
stab people?

MR NJOBO:	No, this did not happen frequently but at that night, it was
Monde and the other one who was stabbed by the police.

MS MAYA:	Was this other guy also stabbed by the police?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, he was stabbed by the police.

MS MAYA:	According to your knowledge, was there any inquest done
concerning this incident?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, we went to the police to lay a charge against them, but
they told us they will contact us, but up until today, they did not.

MS MAYA:	Did you go to any attorneys?

MR NJOBO:	No, we did not contact any attorneys.

MS MAYA:	Is there any reason for that?

MR NJOBO:	No, but we were confused at that time.

MS MAYA:	Do you have any other thing you want to say about Andile and
this incident?

MR NJOBO:	Andile was coming from his work at night, he was working for
me, he was supporting me. He was supporting myself and his mother.

MS MAYA:	In other words, you lost a person who was supporting you?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, I lost a person who was supporting me.

MS MAYA:	What is your request sir, to this Commission?	

MR NJOBO:	My request to this Commission is that up until today, I don't
know who killed my son. The police just told me they will contact me
later.

	My request is that I want the Commission to investigate who killed my
son.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	E NJOBO

MS MAYA:	Is there any other thing you want to say to this Commission?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, I lost my wife because of this.

MS MAYA:	When did your wife die?

MR NJOBO:	My wife died after this incident, because she was sick all the
time. She died two months after this incident.

MS MAYA:	Thank you. I will hand over to the Chairperson, maybe you will
be asked some questions.

REVD FINCA:	June Crichton?

MS CRICHTON:	Mr Njobo, can you hear me?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, I can hear you.

MS CRICHTON:	The night vigil, can you tell me first of all who the night
vigil was for, who had died?

MR NJOBO:	It was Ngalo, it was Ngalo.

MS CRICHTON:	The night vigils that you had, there must have been many of
them at that time, was there a lot of harassment by the police at those
vigils?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, they were harassing people because when they attended
night vigils, police used to harass and assault them.

MS CRICHTON:	Did they try to disrupt the proceedings and get people away
from the vigil?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, they used to go to the night vigils and disrupt everything.

MS CRICHTON:	There was clearly no respect for people who had died? My
second question to you is, did you receive a Death Certificate at all?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, I received a Death Certificate.

MS CRICHTON:	What did it state as the cause of death?

MR NJOBO:	The Death Certificate stated that they are still investigating.
I was told that they were still

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	E NJOBO

investigating and they will contact me.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Njobo, you said that Ngalo was the soldier of Umkhonto We
Sizwe. Do you remember his first name?

MR NJOBO:	Yes, I do. I think it was Maganda, but I am not sure.

REVD FINCA:	According to your knowledge, your son was he the only one
that was killed that night, or who was injured that night?

MR NJOBO:	There is another one who was stabbed the same night.

REVD FINCA:	Was he from the night vigil?

MR NJOBO:	I am not sure, but he was also stabbed that night.

REVD FINCA:	At the time of your son's death, was he involved in the
organisations?

MR NJOBO:	He was a member of CRADORA at the time.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Eric Njobo. We remember these sad days. The days
that the Umkhonto We Sizwe members were killed. We also remember that the
people who were in power at that time, refused permission for others to
go to these kinds of funerals and people were afraid, even ministers were
afraid to attend such funerals.

	They were afraid to go to give support to the families and the families
were supposed to bury these people alone. We think that as you have
presented your testimony, your son went to the night vigil to try and
comfort the families of the soldier.

	We will come back to you and to the guy you have mentioned, Monde, who
was present when these things happened. Our investigating team will come
back to you to get those details so that we can have some more
information from you and from Monde. Thank you.

	--------------------

