	1	F M NKOSI


	1	F M NKOSI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: FLORENCE M NKOSI

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Ms Florence Madodi Nkosi will you please come to the table?
(She is the fifth person from yesterday's file - GA363).

	Florence, welcome. We once more go back to this little place Huhudi
where you come from and we are going back to the 24th of November 1985,
on a Sunday as you say. My colleague, Mr Tom Manthata will be leading you
and helping you through your statement.

FLORENCE NKOSI: (sworn states)

MR MANTHATA: You said you met the police and what happened thereafter.
How did they handle you?

MS NKOSI: In 1985 on the 24th of November there was a UDF meeting,
organized by the Youth League and we were from that meeting. The meeting
stopped at about 5 o'clock in the afternoon. I was together with Maria
and Segofatso. While we were in Mahura a van approached us, which was
full of people - people armed with sjamboks, knives, swords and many
things.

	They stopped next to us. They started chasing us. They caught us and
they put us into a shop and started assaulting us with sjamboks and
knopkieries. They hit me a lot on my head. Everytime I would touch my
head it would be so soft. They hit me until I couldn't feel the pain
anymore.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	F M NKOSI

	They phoned the police and the police came. There was a policeman among
them, called Venter. When he got into the shop, belonging to Steven
Matkloko, he said to me, the bitch is also among the group. They picked
me up and threw me into the Landrover. There was a Landrover and a Hippo
outside the shop.

	They then drove off, we went to Mr Hoffman Galeng's house. They found Mr
Galeng's brother sitting on the stoep. They also assaulted him until he
fainted. They picked him up and also put him into the Landrover. Bulufu
was the person who did this.

	As I mentioned there was a Landrover and a Hippo and this van belonging
to the killers. They called themselves the Inkathas and the police called
them the A team.

	They assaulted me in such a way that the other one amongst them said,
please stop, don't kill her. There was one of them carrying a knife in
his hand. He wanted to stab me. And this was a woman.

	They then took us to the hospital. We spent three days in the hospital,
but every time we were guarded by the police - two in number. We spent
three days in hospital and they released us into the cells.

	We were charged for public violence. We were told that we threw Mr
Mathloko's house with stones. I asked them why should we be charged with
public violence, because those people assaulted me and I didn't do
anything to them. And they said, no you were throwing Mr Mathloko's store
with stones.

	We stayed there in the cells and we were released on R200 bail. The case
continued and so forth.

	We again, in 1986 on the 12th of June, the state of

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	3	F M NKOSI

emergency was introduced and many people were arrested under it. I was
one of those people who got arrested and they took us to Kimberley.

	At Kimberley we were released after three months and two weeks and then
we went home.

	Since those people assaulted me, those people who called themselves
Inkatha and the police. They assaulted me on the head. Even I can't hear
clearly with my ears, because of what happened to me.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you through?

MS NKOSI: Yes, I am through.

MR MANTHATA: Florence, when they arrested you, were you still on your way
to the youth meeting?

MS NKOSI: No, we were from the meeting at that time.

MR MANTHATA: There seems that there were about 500 people at the rally?

MS NKOSI: Yes, there were many people there.

MR MANTHATA: Did they only chose you and your friends among you?

MS NKOSI: No, people were running away into the other yards and we were
just nearer to them, and that is why they arrested us.

MR MANTHATA: Were you a student at that time or were you only a youth at
that time?

MS NKOSI: No, I was not a student, I was just at home.

MR MANTHATA: It seems as if they knew you before they arrested you?

MS NKOSI: How did they say they knew me?

MR MANTHATA: Because they called you by other names. Did they already
knew you before they arrested you, like they said you were a bitch?

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	4	F M NKOSI

MS NKOSI: Yes, when that guy entered the shop, he said the bitch is also
here, come - that was Venter.

MR MANTHATA: That is why I ask you if they already knew you.

MS NKOSI: Yes, these people who call themselves Inkatha already knew me.

MR MANTHATA: Was it not for the first time the arrested or attacked you?

MS NKOSI: No, it was for the first time by then.

MR MANTHATA: Did you open a case which was later dissolved?

MS NKOSI: Yes, we did that.

MR MANTHATA: What bail did you pay?

MS NKOSI: That was after the assault after which we were later put in
prison. That was when we received bail - when we got out of prison.

MR MANTHATA: Did you lost the case who assaulted you for nothing?

MS NKOSI: No, we never lost the case against those people who assaulted
us for nothing. But the police came to us and asked whether we want to
open a case, but we said to them, no. Even if we open a case you won't
make any investigation.

MR MANTHATA: I thank you, I don't have any more questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Florence, when you were released from the state of emergency
they picked you up. Did they tell you why they picked you up? You said
you were released and when the state of emergency started you were
arrested again. I want to know the reason for your arrest.

MS NKOSI: They said they want to remove us from the



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	5	F M NKOSI

township so there can be no violence. They wanted to keep us in the cells
so there can be peace in the township.

DR RANDERA: Florence, I just want to come back to the question that Mr
Manthata and Ms Seroke has already asked. And that is were you an
activist in those days and were you proud of what you were doing, in
terms of bringing about change in that area?

MS NKOSI: Yes, I was one of the youth and because we had leaders we also
wished that Huhudi could undergo changes, because at that time we were
using bucket systems for the toilets and people were forced to go to
Pudumo, and we didn't also want to go to Pudumo.

MR MALAN: May I again follow through on that question please.

	Florence, you said that they accused you at the time of public violence,
having so-called thrown stones at the shop. Were there indeed stones
thrown at the stop on that day by other people, or were you involved?

MS NKOSI: I'm not sure whether there were any people who stoned the shop,
because when we arrived there there were no people throwing stones.

MR MALAN: Thank you.

MR MANTHATA: Are you working, Florence?

MS NKOSI: No, I'm not working, I'm just staying at home.

MR MANTHATA: These are the sufferings that the youth in Vryburg suffered,
Florence. We thank you for coming you today and that you spoke to us
about your experiences. We hoe that these things will disappear.

	We keep on saying that we will work with each other to eradicate all the
things that happened.

	The Commission is not going to work on its own to help

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	6	F M NKOSI

you, it is going to work with you, the people of Vryburg.

	We thank you therefore, and we want to thank your family members for
allowing you to come to us.

	We want to thank.

MS NKOSI: I also thank you, sir.

	---------------------------

