
	1	J NKUEMYANE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	30.10.96		NAME:	J NKUEMYANE

CASE: - 		ALEXANDRA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

MR LEWIN: Could you call the next witness please. It is Julia Nkuemyane.
Is she here? Is she here yet? Mrs Nkuemyane, can you hear me?

MRS NKUEMYANE: Yes, I can hear you sir.

MR LEWIN: And are you comfortable?

MRS NKUEMYANE: Yes, I am comfortable.

MR LEWIN: Could I ask you please as we require that you take the oath.

JULIA NKUEMYANE: (Duly sworn in, states).

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much. As is custom, I will ask Yasim Sooka,
Commissioner, please to lead you.

MS SOOKA: Mama, thank you for coming to the Commission. Before you begin
your story about your son, Donald, do you want to tell us a little bit
about yourself?

MRS NKUEMYANE: To tell you about my life and my family. What is it
actually that you want me, to tell you about myself and my family. I am
Mrs Nkuemyane. I reside at number 63 8.

	I do not know what happened about my son, Donald, because I was not
around when they killed my son, but the people came to me, they came to
my house. The boy that was with Donald is the one who came to tell me
what happened about my son. My son was killed by the Boers at Fourth
Avenue. I do not know, but this boy told me that he was

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	J NKUEMYANE

with him.

	The left on a Friday. They were going to Tembisa. They came back from
Tembisa. When they were on their way home they were in Club 65. On the
Fourth Avenue they find police who were standing there at the Fourth
Avenue. This boy told me that my son ran away as the other people were
running away and the police chased them away, but this boy did not run
away. That is when my son was shot because they were being chased by the
police and they were running away. That is when my son was shot. I did
not see anything. I just heard the people saying what happened. I heard
all this from this boy who was with my son. We buried Donald.

	They said the case was going to be heard at Randburg Police Station.
When his father went to the court he was told that the witnesses did not
come. They said he must bring this boy who was with Donald on that day,
but it was very difficult for my husband to get this boy to go to the
court. They said they want other group of witnesses. The third witness
except this Moreni. They said that the case was heard and there was no
witness. Until today there was nothing that was done. That is why I
decided to come to the Truth Commission. I think they are going to help
me because we had problems that our cases were not heard. I know that the
Truth Commission can help us to investigate what happened. That is why I
have taken this decision to come to the Truth Commission.

	I gave the Truth Commission people the statement and the letters from
the police and the other copies. I gave them all the evidence that I had
with me. This is the end of my story.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Mama. I am just going to ask you a few ALEXANDRA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	J NKUEMYANE

questions so that I just have your story clearly down. Mama, how old was
your son and was he attending school at the time?

MRS NKUEMYANE: He was still at school in Minerva High School. He was 17
years old when he died.

MS SOOKA: Mama, to your knowledge, was he a member of any political
grouping in Alexandra?

MRS NKUEMYANE: Yes, my children are ANC members. My children, since they
grew up, they were ANC members.

MS SOOKA: Mama, at the time that he was growing up it must have been
before the ANC was unbanned. So was he a member of COSAS or a member of
the Action Committee or the UDF? Can you be a bit more specific?

MRS NKUEMYANE: I think he was a member of COSAS.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Mama. Can you tell me, Johannes, was he a school
friend of his?

MRS NKUEMYANE: Johannes was not a friend as such, but they knew each
other. He said he was his friend because they were staying at Eighth
Avenue. He is my friend now, this boy.

MS SOOKA: Mama, the night when Donald was shot, you say in your statement
that they ran away and the police started shooting at them. Was Johannes
with Donald.

MRS NKUEMYANE: It is a hearsay, I was not there. I heard the people
saying that he ran away. I did not see while he was being shot.

MS SOOKA: Mama, one last question. The funeral, was that a political
funeral? Was Donald the only person who had been shot or had there been
other people shot with him?

MRS NKUEMYANE: It was a mass funeral and the Comrades came to my house
and said to me they want me to join with the

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	J NKUEMYANE

other people who died on that same day. They must be together when they
are buried. I told them that I have my own arrangement and you came very
late. I request you to let me bury my son because I have my own date, but
they wanted me to bury him the following day with the others.

MS SOOKA: Mama, did they assist you, then, with finance for the funeral
or did you manage to do all of that yourself?

MRS NKUEMYANE: I was the one who was doing all the arrangements. They
wanted to help me, but they came very late, after I had done all the
arrangements.

MS SOOKA: Mama, do you have any other children?

MRS NKUEMYANE: I have only one child. I had two children at the time.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Mama. I am going to hand you back to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Any questions.

MS MKHIZE: You have told us that you were not around when this incident
took place. Maybe, Johannes told you who was this policeman who was in
charge on that particular day. The policeman who shot at your son.

MRS NKUEMYANE: You know what, even when my child died, I was very
confused. This boy was talking, but he just told me that he was killed by
the police. The way I was so confused, I could not even ask a lot of
questions. I do not have information. I only knew that my child was
killed and I was so confused. I did not even know what to do.

MS MKHIZE: But this Johannes told me that the police killed your son.

MRS NKUEMYANE: I did not have time to ask him a lot of questions because
I was not in a position. I was confused. MS MKHIZE: Did you lay any
charges?

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	J NKUEMYANE

MRS NKUEMYANE: We opened the case. I have told that my husband was going
to run that police station where they wanted witnesses and Johannes
Moreni was not available at the time. We went to Johannes Moreni's home.
We asked about him. They said he was not there. My husband went to court
and Johannes Moreni never appeared in court. They told my husband that we
are still going to investigate. Until today they never came back, the
police.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Joyce Seroke.

MS SEROKE: Ms Julia, you say your child was from the Club during the
night. Was that during the time of the State of Emergency?

MRS NKUEMYANE: Yes, it was during the time of the State of Emergency, but
when he left home it was during the day. I do not know what happened
during the night. I just heard all this from his friend and that is what
he said even in the statement. I did not see them. I last saw him, it was
during the day. They were leaving for Tembisa.

MS SEROKE: You said you saw your son who was shot at the back and the
police removed his clothes.

MRS NKUEMYANE: I am not the one who said that. It is the statement from
Johannes Moreni. It is not what I said. This is the statement that I gave
to the staff of the Truth Commission. I told them that the statement is
from Johannes Moreni.

MS SEROKE: You say you got his clothes?

MRS NKUEMYANE: Yes, Johannes Moreni brought his clothes.

MS SEROKE: On that very same night when your child was killed or maybe
the following day?

MRS NKUEMYANE: I think it was the following day when he

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	J NKUEMYANE

brought his clothes.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, mam. As I have already said that we do
not have enough words to comfort you. What we are going to try is to
investigate and get the truth of what actually happened. How did it
happen, how was he shot, even if he was doing something wrong, but why
would he be shot at the back, because if was shot in the front, that
would look like he was fighting. We are going to investigate all those
things. We as the Truth Commission is to try to get the truth of all
these things so that we will be able to say. Even if it is difficult, at
least now we know what the truth is. Thank you very much mam.

MRS NKUEMYANE: Thank you.





































ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

