
	1	T NOKIE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: TINA BABSIE NOKIE

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We will now call on Ms Tina Babsie Nokie.

TINA BABSIE NOKIE: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: I understand that you are going to be giving your evidence
in Afrikaans so I would like to say to you that my Afrikaans isn't all
that good.

	According to the statement you were one of the persons who was on your
way to the funeral on the 21 of March 1985, is that correct?

MS NOKIE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Will you please give the Commission a very brief explanation
of what happened and of how you were injured.

MS NOKIE: We were on our way to the graveyard. We went down Maduna Road
and there was a Hippo following us. We went past Mittles shop down 16th
Avenue and we stood there singing. There was a hippo in front of us and
behind us and there was also a Rastafarian that was in front who was
telling us the route that we were going to take to the graveyard and the
hippo was in front. While standing there they started shooting at us.
Thereafter we were lying on

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	T NOKIE

the ground. Having being shot, I was also injured and I was lying on the
ground.

CHAIRPERSON: Could you please tell the Commission about the nature of
your injury?

MS NOKIE: They struck me four times in my back, one on my upper right
arm, one on my upper left arm. I was lying there. They came to place
stones next to me. When the ambulance arrived, they picked us up and took
us to the hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: Were you in hospital for 2 months, at Uitenhage Provincial
Hospital?

MS NOKIE: Yes, I was at the Provincial Hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: Is there any particular doctor that is currently treating
you from time to time for the treatment?

MS NOKIE: Do you mean at the moment?

CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MS NOKIE: No, I am not under any doctor at the moment.

CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any complaints?

MS NOKIE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: What is your complaint?

MS NOKIE: My complaint is that I am battling. I have a house, I don't
have any income, I cannot work for myself, I cannot do anything for
myself and I am at hospital at least every month. I have a bullet in my
stomach, and every month my stomach swells up and I have to be admitted
into hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: The bullet that you refer to in your stomach, what did the
doctors say about that? Why have they not been able to remove it?

MS NOKIE: The last time they said to me that they would remove it, but
then they didn't say anything about it

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	T NOKIE

thereafter.

CHAIRPERSON: When was this? Is there anything else that you would like to
tell the Commission?

MS NOKIE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: What is that?

MS NOKIE: I am battling, I don't have any income. I have a child who is
at school and I don't have any money to care for my child and to buy my
child a uniform. We are hungry at home, I don't have any money. They
don't want to give me a grant and they keep returning my application form.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you receive a State pension at any stage?

MS NOKIE: I applied the first time.

CHAIRPERSON: What was the result thereof?

MS NOKIE: They sent the papers back to me saying that I should go and
work, saying that I am fit to go and work.

CHAIRPERSON: What did they say about the doctors opinion in the papers,
did the doctors declare you unfit to work?

MS NOKIE: Yes the papers came back saying that I am fit to work.

CHAIRPERSON: Is that all that you would like to say to the Commission
today in connection with this matter?

MS NOKIE: I would like to ask the Commission if it cannot be of
assistance to me. I don't have any income, I've got a child who is still
at school. Nobody is working and I am unable to work because I am sick
and I can't do much for myself.

CHAIRPERSON: The other people who gave evidence, referred to the Jubilee
Hotel, saying that they were called there, were you also called?

MS NOKIE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: What happened there?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	T NOKIE

MS NOKIE: We were called, and they compensated us.

CHAIRPERSON: Were you also compensated?

MS NOKIE: Yes, I was given R29 000.

CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything else you would like to say to this
Commission? Is that all you would like to say to the Commission?

MS NOKIE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much Ms Nokie.

----------------------



