


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 12.02.97			NAME: ANGELINA RAMPO NOMAVUKA

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________

ANGELINA RAMPO NOMAVUKA: (sworn states)

MR SANDI: Are your full names Angelina Rampo Nomavuka.

MRS NOMAVUKA: That's correct.

MR SANDI: The child that you are going to talk about, is Xola Owen
Nomavuka?

MRS NOMAVUKA: That's correct.

MR SANDI: How old was Xola Owen Nomavuka at the time of his death?

MRS NOMAVUKA: He was 18 years old.

MR SANDI: Was he still a scholar at the time?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes, he was doing standard 10.

MR SANDI: How did you hear about your son's death.

MRS NOMAVUKA: I was at home, my sister's children came to my house to
tell me that Xola was shot and they were on their way to fetch the corpse
of the other boy who was also shot in Port Elizabeth. On the way back
when they were at Skhulu Street Namapeni came out and shot them and the
sister of Mrs January.

MR SANDI: You say he was shot by Velule Namapeni Buzani?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes that's correct.

MR SANDI: Did you know Velule Namapeni Buzani?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes I know him from the farm.

MR SANDI: Was he a policeman here in Cradock?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes.

MR SANDI: How can you describe him as a policeman, his behaviour?

MRS NOMAVUKA: He was behaving well, I didn't have problems with him,
because I knew him and his parents from the farm.

MR SANDI: You say he was behaving well?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Isn't it true that Mr Buzani said that these children were just
passing by and were singing, he just decided to shoot?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes he did. I am saying, just before this incident, I was
still on the farm. I knew him from the farm, Namapeni.

MR SANDI: Did you hear that most of the people in the statements here
when describing this incident, they are saying that these children were
just passing by but Buzani just decided to shoot?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes that's correct.

MR SANDI: Weren't you shocked by this news.

MRS NOMAVUKA: I was very shocked because I never expected that to be done
by him.

MR SANDI: Did you hear that there was perhaps any attempt to attack
Buzani? Did you hear that one of the children maybe attempted to attack
Buzani?

MRS NOMAVUKA: No I just heard that they were just on their way.

MR SANDI: Did Xola ever go to the hospital just before his death?

MRS NOMAVUKA: When I went to the scene I realised that he was taken to
the hospital.

MR SANDI: Did you see him at the hospital?

MRS NOMAVUKA: No, the people said I mustn't go to the hospital, I must
just stay at home.

MR SANDI: When did you hear about his death?

CHAIRPERSON: heard when they came back, my sister's children came to me
to tell me about his death the very same day.

MR SANDI: Were there any disruptions during the funeral?

MRS NOMAVUKA: There were no disruptions and he was not buried at my home,
he was taken by one of the gentlemen who stay in No 74, he's the one who
was responsible for everything.

MR SANDI: Was he buried here at Cradock?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Did you get any visits from the police before the funeral?

MRS NOMAVUKA: There were policemen around.

MR SANDI: Did they talk to you as a family?

MRS NOMAVUKA: No.

MR SANDI: You say the police were around. Were they around before the
funeral or during the funeral? Did the police visit your house during the
funeral?

MRS NOMAVUKA: No.

MR SANDI: Is that all that you'd like to tell us?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Do you have any wish or request that you'd like to forward to
the Commission?

MRS NOMAVUKA: All I request is his tombstone.

MR SANDI: Is that all Mrs Nomavuka?

MRS NOMAVUKA: One other request, if possible, because I'm not working, if
I can get some assistance and the person who was responsible for my son's
marriage, if she can be compensated.

MR SANDI: Do you mean the expenses of your son's burial?

MRS NOMAVUKA: Yes.

MR SANDI: Thank you Mrs Nomavuka. I'll hand over to the chairperson.
Thank you Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you very much, we have heard your painful story. We
sympathise with you about what happened to you, it's very hurting to hear
what one of you said, that when you used to seek for help from the police
the police would just send you away. But this is not a surprise because
we know that it is something that used to happen during those days. We
thank you for coming to the Commission. What we cannot do is to give you
back your beloved ones but the request that you forwarded, we're going to
take it to the President, especially the one that you say about
assistance and try to get the tombstone for your relatives. On behalf of
the Commission we deeply sympathise with you, we promise that we are
going to forward all your requests to the President of this country.
Thank you.

	------------------------

