	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	NOMAKULA NOTWALA

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:		We will call to the stand Nomakula Notwala. We welcome you
Mrs Nomakula Notwala. We will hand over to Reverend Xundu to administer
the oath, after that Ntsiki Sandi will lead you in evidence. Thank you.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

NOMAKULA NOTWALA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Mr Chairperson, the witness has been properly
sworn in.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mrs Notwala, you have made a request
to talk about Sonwabo Mdekazi, who was your brother. Is that so Mrs
Notwala?

MRS NOTWALA:	Yes, sir.

MR SANDI:	As you gave your statement, you said that your brother was shot
in 1987. Where was he shot?

MRS NOTWALA:	He was shot in Port Elizabeth.

MR SANDI:	Could you briefly tell us about your brother? According to your
statement he went into exile, what was he involved in politically?

MRS NOTWALA:	In 1977 he was a student in Cradock. He burnt down a school,
he was sentenced to three years imprisonment.

	He went into prison, St Albans, he was released in November, 1980. He
then went into exile in 1981. We were never happy again at home. The
police constantly would come up. Sometimes they would put him into a
sack, this is when

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	N NOTWALA

my mother started being ill of health.

	She also went blind.

MR SANDI:	Are these the sacks that the police usually used to torture
people?

MRS NOTWALA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Is this what he would tell you when he came back from prison?

MRS NOTWALA:	No, they would take him from home and put him into a sack at
home and then take him to prison.

MR SANDI:	Do you know any police, the names of the police who did that?

MRS NOTWALA:	I remember Gcali.

MR SANDI:	Is Gcali still a policeman in Port Elizabeth?

MRS NOTWALA:	I don't know, it was here in Cradock.

MR SANDI:	When last did you hear about Gcali?

MRS NOTWALA:	It has been a while, because he left Cradock.

MR SANDI:	You said that Sonwabo left, when did he leave?

MRS NOTWALA:	He left in 1984, left Cradock in 1984.

MR SANDI:	Where was he going?

MRS NOTWALA:	He didn't say where he was going. It is just the police who
would come and say that they have killed him or they kept him in prison.
We didn't know exactly what was happening with him, we got different
reports.

MR SANDI:	Would he write to you or phone you or anything like that?

MRS NOTWALA:	No, he did not contact us.

MR SANDI:	Did you hear about his whereabouts? Let's go back to 1987 - you
say that in August, on the 5th of August 1987, what exactly happened?

MRS NOTWALA:	On the 5th of August 1987, there was a policeman from the
Special Branch that came to our house.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	N NOTWALA

He came and told us that he killed Sonwabo at the Port Elizabeth airport.

	We tried to investigate, we told our brothers in Port Elizabeth. We just
accepted that report that he had been killed at the airport. However,
later we found out that he was not killed at the airport, but he was
killed at Gekiza Road, at New Brighton.

	There was a case going on, and we would continue going to Port
Elizabeth, but no one was convicted. When the court case was over, the
court of law declared that Sonwabo was a well-trained terrorist and
therefor no one can be convicted.

MR SANDI:	Did you ascertain who it is who came and gave the report that
he had killed Sonwabo?

MRS NOTWALA:	No, we did not. These people never identified themselves.

MR SANDI:	When you would go to the court of law, did you see this police?

MRS NOTWALA:	Well, I can't say, because there were a lot of police that
would come to our house and you didn't know who to take seriously.

MR SANDI:	Is there somebody else that was shot in Gekiza Road?

MRS NOTWALA:	No one else was shot, but him.

MR SANDI:	The people who saw this, the witnesses, what did they say
happened?

MRS NOTWALA:	Nobody ever gave evidence as such. We just got a report from
court that he had been shot in Gekiza Road.

MR SANDI:	You didn't even hear rumours that perhaps he had been killed a
certain way?

MRS NOTWALA:	No, because we are here in Cradock.

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	N NOTWALA

MR SANDI:	Do you have his Death Certificate?

MRS NOTWALA:	Yes, I do.

MR SANDI:	Before I ask you what your requests are before the Commission,
is that all that you have to say?

MRS NOTWALA:	Yes, sir.

MR SANDI:	Do you have a request to the Commission?

MRS NOTWALA:	Yes, I do. I would like to request that the Commission gives
him a tombstone and also to help my mother.

MR SANDI:	Where was he buried?

MRS NOTWALA:	He was buried here in Cradock.

MR SANDI:	Is that all you have to say Mrs Notwala?

MRS NOTWALA:	Yes, thank you.

MR SANDI:	I will hand you over to Mr Chairperson, thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Mrs Notwala, I just want to understand. When Sonwabo was in
exile, was he a member of the ANC?

MRS NOTWALA:	Yes, he was working actually for the ANC.

REVD FINCA:	Was he a soldier?

MRS NOTWALA:	Well, I don't know.

REVD FINCA:	You just heard that he was killed in New Brighton?

MRS NOTWALA:	Excuse me?

REVD FINCA:	You just discovered that he was killed in New Brighton in
1987? You didn't even know whether he is a soldier, Umkhonto We Sizwe
soldier?

MRS NOTWALA:	No.

REVD FINCA:	When he died, who told you? Was it the ANC or the police?

MRS NOTWALA:	The police.

REVD FINCA:	Is it the police that told you that he had been killed by the
police? Did the ANC give you any report of his death?

CRADOCK HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5	N NOTWALA

MRS NOTWALA:	No.

REVD FINCA:	On the day of the funeral, was there an ANC speaker?

MRS NOTWALA:	No, there was not. There wasn't because we were only given
three hours to bury him for the funeral. Everything was done in a rush.

REVD FINCA:	After the ANC was unbanned, did the ANC give a report that
your brother was a member of Umkhonto We Sizwe and died whilst in battle?

MRS NOTWALA:	Nobody came.

REVD FINCA:	Who prepared for the funeral?

MRS NOTWALA:	Headbush in Port Elizabeth.

REVD FINCA:	Are there leaders of the ANC where you stayed?

MRS NOTWALA:	Well, I don't know because I was not a member of the ANC, I
was not in the struggle, it was Sonwabo who was in the struggle.

REVD FINCA:	I am asking these questions, because I just need clarity on
the fact that if someone dies in battle, then the organisation, be it ANC
or AZAPO, then they at least show that it is their soldier that has
passed away.

	I am not saying that is the case, but I would like to investigate, for
us to investigate on exactly what happened, because we cannot depend on a
police report. There should be ownership from the organisation that he
had been deployed by the ANC to Port Elizabeth. We would like to put this
in a political context.

	If there is anything else we need to investigate, or any questions we
need from you, we will come back to you. In the mean time thank you very
much for your help. We will try to delve deeper into the matter, thank
you.

	--------------------

