23 March 1997


SECOND SUBMISSION OF THE NATIONAL PARTY TO THE TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION
COMMISSION



Introduction


The purpose of this submission is to comment on the Truth and
Reconciliation process thus far; to respond to the submission of the ANC;
and to reply to the questions that the Commission submitted to the
National Party on 12 December 1996.

General Comments

We would like, at the outset, to wish the Chairman a complete and speedy
recovery after his recent illness.

We would also like to congratulate him and the Commission on the role
that they played in securing the extension of the cut-off date for
amnesty to 27 April 1994.

Apart from this we are deeply concerned about the manner in which the
truth and reconciliation process is developing.

Most seriously, it has become evident that the Commission is losing its
credibility among some of our communities and parties, including a large
majority of members of the National Party. The reasons for this loss of
credibility include the following:

* Despite the often praiseworthy efforts of the Chairman, the
  Commission is not perceived to be impartial. Its composition is seen to
  be overwhelmingly representative of only one side in the former
  conflict. An analysis of the statements and speeches of some leading
  members of the Commission indicates that they tend to view the conflict
  of the past from the broad perspective of the ANC and its allies. There
  is deep concern that their report might simply give an official
  endorsement of this one-sided view of our history. So far the
  Commission's activities have contributed to these concerns: its
  investigations have been targeted almost exclusively against those
  associated with the former Government, and its behaviour at times
  appears to be increasingly aggressive and prosecutorial. At the same
  time, comparatively little is said, written or reported about the
  abuses perpetrated by those who were opposed to the Government.


* The Commission's actions and hearings are beginning to create a
  skewed perception of the conflict, based as they are on the highly
  emotive testimony of victims who represent predominantly only one side
  of the conflict. These perceptions are being fanned and magnified by
  the SABC, which uses every opportunity to cast a pall of collective
  guilt over anyone associated with the former Government or with our
  party. Whole classes of decent people and communities are being
  associated in the public's perceptions with the criminal actions of a
  few individuals, of which they were not aware and which they would not
  have condoned had they known of them. The overwhelming majority of the
  members of our Party have been horrified by the revelations of abuses
  that have come to light as a result of the activities of the Commission
  and other investigations that preceded it.


* Many of those in the targeted communities and parties regard the
  Commission's approach as being contrary to the spirit of the historic
  agreement that gave birth to the New South Africa. The essence of our
  peaceful transition was that parties that had previously been caught in
  an escalating spiral of conflict decided freely to pursue a peaceful
  resolution of the problems that had for so long divided them. Central
  to this process was the acceptance that no-one would be victimised for
  actions taken during the preceding conflict and that there would be a
  genuine and even-handed effort to promote reconciliation. This is not
  happening. Millions of supporters of the National Party who
  enthusiastically welcomed the New South Africa, who voted for reform
  policies in 1987, 1989 and in the referendum of 1992, are now beginning
  to feel alienated and victimised. It is just as important to recognise
  the role played by the National Party and a wide variety of South
  Africans in creating the New South Africa as it is to identify those
  who were responsible for the abuses of human rights that were
  perpetrated by all sides in the conflict.


* The Commission is becoming increasingly involved in the party
  political process. Some of the Commission's actions and statements,
  such as its press conference on 16 January 1997, have created the
  impression that it has adopted a partisan stance against our Party and
  its leaders. (Please refer in this regard to the attached press
  statement issued by the National Party). Concerns are being expressed
  that the Commission may be misused by the ANC to the detriment of other
  political parties in the run-up to the 1999 elections.


We have recently seen an example of this: a leading member of the ANC,
himself an applicant for amnesty, has on the basis of testimony brought
before the TRC, accused me as Leader of our Party of having known about
political assassinations, apparently committed by the security forces
during my presidency. This led a leading newspaper to publish a headline
proclaiming "De Klerk's death farms" - as though this were a matter of
proven fact. All this occurred despite the lack of any supporting
evidence whatsoever and categorical denials from me that I had ever been
aware of such developments. Such accusations, arising from the
Commission's public activities are not only grossly unfair - they are
undermining the ability of a legitimate political party to participate on
an equal basis in the democratic process.

Much of this has its roots, not only in the conduct of some of the
Commissioners, but also in the basically flawed nature of the
Commission's composition and methods. The absence of any significant
representation from the side of the former government on the Commission
will inevitably raise questions regarding the TRC's impartiality. The
fact that most of the Commission's hearings are in public and that
testimony before it is not subject to proper examination, opens the
possibility for abuse, for the stirring up of divisive emotions and for
trial by media. It is, in retrospect, a great pity that South Africa did
not follow the Chilean Truth and Reconciliation model which made
provision for equal representation, in camera proceedings and a much
speedier process.

* The commission is also beginning to intrude increasingly in areas
  which fall outside its responsibility of establishing the circumstances
  related to gross violations of human rights - including investigations
  into the role of the medical profession and the media.


In raising these points, the National Party wishes to emphasise that it
has no problem with bona fide efforts to establish the truth regarding
the conflict of the past. It will also enthusiastically support any
genuine effort to promote national reconciliation. It believes, however,
that the Commission's present approach is seriously flawed and that
unless it can take rapid and effective steps to convince all parties of
its impartiality it will not succeed with its historic task. One-sided
"truth" is no truth at all. Facts taken out of perspective can be as
misleading as lies.

We would accordingly suggest that the Commission should urgently address
these perceptions. It should, in particular, apart from issuing
statements to that effect, take specific steps to reassure all South
Africans of its even-handedness and its intention of establishing the
truth about all gross abuses of human rights committed by all parties
during the conflict.

It will be essential in this regard to bring some overall perspective to
the events that occurred during our conflict. Despite the attention that
it is focusing on abuses committed by agents of former governments, the
probability is that the great majority of people who died were victims of
the conflict between various revolutionary and non-revolutionary
organisations which were all opposed to apartheid. Also, some of the most
horrendous abuses - such as the necklacing of more than 500 people - were
committed by elements opposed to the former government. We suggest that
the TRC should accordingly prepare an analysis that will a) indicate the
scale of the conflict that occurred in South Africa compared with the
conflict that has been experienced by other transitional societies; and
b) provide an assessment of the total number of South Africans

* who died during the political conflict;


* who died or who were seriously injured as a result of security force
  action;


* who died, or who were tortured or seriously injured as a result of
  illegal operations of the security forces;


* who died as a result of the actions of the armed wings of the ANC,
  the PAC and other guerrilla organisations;


* who were killed by the ANC, the UDF, the Mass Democratic Movement,
  the Civics and other organisations because they were associated with,
  or supportive of, the former Government;


* who were seriously injured - or whose homes and properties were
  destroyed - in the course of the intimidation campaigns carried out by
  the ANC, the UDF, the Mass Democratic Movement, the Civics and other
  organisations; and


* who died, or who were seriously injured, or who had their homes
  destroyed in the conflict in Kwa-Zulu/Natal, including an indication of
  the number of ANC, IFP and non-aligned victims.


It is the essence of the Commission's task to determine in an even-handed
fashion who was responsible for all these deaths and gross violations of
human rights.

Concerns remain regarding other aspects of the TRC's activities -
particularly in respect of the criteria that it will follow in assessing
responsibility and the broad approach that it intends to take with regard
to the granting of amnesty. We suggest that the TRC should

1. respond to the proposals contained in my submission regarding the
   criteria that should be used in determining responsibility for abuses
   committed by all sides in the conflicts of the past; and


1. establish a clear policy regarding the granting of amnesty that
   will be consistent with the Commission's overall task of promoting
   reconciliation. In this regard, deep resentment and hostility will be
   aroused if the Commission applies a harsher standard in respect of
   members of the Security forces than that demanded by the ANC in
   respect of the granting of amnesty to its operatives in terms of the
   Further Indemnity Act of 1992 - or if the Commission appears to be
   following a policy of retribution.



The submission of the ANC

Far from promoting unity and reconciliation, the TRC process has too
often been used to accentuate differences and to revert to the rhetoric
of confrontation. This was particularly the case with the submission made
by the ANC.

Whereas I avoided playing politics in my criticism of the ANC in my
submission and tried to understand the historic framework within which
the ANC had operated, no such effort was made by the ANC in its
submission. Instead, the ANC has clung to its own rigid and doctrinaire
interpretation of the conflict. It has made no effort to seek the common
ground that is so essential for reconciliation and has reverted to the
hackneyed polemics and diatribes of the past.

It does not respond at all to the National Party's constructive analysis
of the framework within which the conflict took place. It gives no
recognition of the legitimate considerations that motivated those who
fought on the Government side:

* that many of those involved were fighting for the preservation of
  their historic right to national self-determination;


* that many were carrying out their duty to maintain law and order and
  to defend a duly constituted and internationally recognised State from
  armed insurrection; and


* that many others felt it their duty to defend their country and their
  region from the threat of international communist expansion.


Instead, the ANC dismisses quite wrongfully all those who fought on the
Government side as racists intent on the perpetual suppression of black
South Africans.

It gives no recognition to the enormous changes, including constitutional
changes and the amendment or repeal of many racist and discriminatory
laws, and developments that took place within the country - particularly
from 1978 onwards - which were instrumental in bringing about the
peaceful transformation of our society.

Neither does the ANC acknowledge that a very large part of the conflict
took place between the different sections of the nation who had opposing
views on how apartheid should be combated. In particular, it ignores its
own struggle against the Inkatha Freedom Party and the campaign of mass
intimidation that it and its surrogates carried out against anyone who
was not part of the struggle or who worked for transformation from within
the system.


Gross violations of human rights perpetrated by the ANC and its allies

The ANC's submission deals only in the most superficial manner with its
own involvement in the gross violations of human rights.

Necklace murders

The ANC and its allies cannot absolve themselves of responsibility for
necklacing which caused the deaths of more than 500 people in the most
horrible circumstances imaginable. Neither can they shift the blame for
these atrocities onto the security forces as they are trying to do. The
following facts contradict its claims that it never supported or condoned
such methods:

* In an interview with Sechaba in December 1986, the late Chris Hani
  condoned the use of necklace murders:


"So the necklace was a weapon devised by the oppressed themselves to
remove this cancer from our society, the cancer of collaboration of the
puppets. We have our own revolutionary methods of dealing with
collaborators, the methods of the ANC. But I refuse to condemn our people
when they meet out their own traditional forms of justice to those who
collaborate. As far as I am concerned the question of the necklace and
how it should be used belongs to all of us, to the ANC, to the democratic
movement. "

* On 7 October 1985 the ANC's Radio Freedom broadcast the following
  comment:


"The policy of burning sell-outs of the system seems to have paid out
well in the ultimate end."

* At a meeting at California State University on 10 October 1985 ANC
  spokesman Alosi Moloi said that:


"Among us we have people who have openly collaborated with the enemy. You
have to eliminate one to save hundreds of others."

* At the same meeting Tim Ngubane of the ANC said that


"We want to make the death of a collaborator so grotesque that people
will never think of it."

* On 13 April 1986 Winnie Manela said:


"?with our boxes of matches and our necklaces, we shall liberate this
country."

It is also significant that some of the 525 prisoners whose release the
ANC demanded on 26 September 1992 as its price for returning to the
negotiating table had been convicted of necklace murders and other
heinous offences. Nevertheless, the ANC claimed them for its own. One of
these people, George Skosana, said on his release from prison that "he
would do it again if he had to." He said that he remembered the dying
screams of the "police informer" he helped to burn alive in Saulsville:

"We were angry and he was our enemy, so we necklaced him. I felt happy
watching him burn."

Another of those released at the insistence of the ANC was Lucky Malaza
who described how he had helped to kill a man called Fanayana:

"?.We put the tyre around him, poured petrol on him and lit a match. He
screamed and screamed and tried to pull the tyre off, but could not. I
looked at his face. It was like meat. He took a long time to die."


Abuses committed by the Mass Democratic Movement, the United Democratic
Front and Civic Organisations

The ANC seeks to avoid responsibility for the abuses committed during the
conflict by elements within the Mass Democratic Movement, the United
Democratic Front and the Civics, by claiming that it was not responsible
for the actions of these organisations. In fact, these organisations were
often deeply influenced or controlled by the ANC. In any event, the
leadership of these organisations, many of whom now occupy senior
positions within the ANC Alliance, have a duty to explain their
involvement in human rights abuses, and specifically in necklace murders.

It is within this context that the ANC and the former leadership of the
MDM, UDF and civics must also explain the campaign of intimidation and
violence against their opponents in the black community - and
particularly those who worked within the system.

In the December 1986 issue of Sechaba, Chris Hani said the following:

"As the result of the armed element of the struggle, including MK and
other armed units, military units of our people which are born out of the
struggle, our people have utilised the skills we have imparted to them to
deal with the police, community councillors and collaborationist
elements. By so doing we have rendered most townships ungovernable."

The May 1986 issue of Sechaba, Ronnie Kasrils said:

"We have also seen people counter-attacking in the white suburbs and city
centres, creating confusion and fear in the enemy's ranks. We have seen
them attacking the community councillors and the informers and here they
have had to resort to rough justice, for the State relies on its
loathsome army of sell-outs and informers, and unless a people arisen can
purge its community of the enemy within, it is not possible to advance ".

We need to know who was responsible for this mass campaign of terror and
intimidation against thousands of black South Africans whose only crime
was their rejection of the ANC's armed struggle and their desire to serve
their communities within existing structures. We must remember that many
of the community councillors enjoyed genuine and proven support. In the
1988 municipal elections there was a 26% voter turn-out - despite massive
intimidation by the ANC and its allies. In a large number of communities
more than 50% of registered voters cast their ballots.


The Conflict between the ANC and the IFP

The ANC must, in particular, explain its role in the on-going violence in
Kwa-Zulu Natal which has been responsible for the greatest number of
deaths by far. Until now attention of the Commission, the courts and
special investigation units has been focused overwhelmingly on the role
of the IFP and the agents of the former Government in the struggle
between the ANC and the IFP. Yet more than 400 hundred office-bearers of
the IFP were systematically murdered and many more thousands of its
followers were killed or attacked by followers of the ANC and its allies.
Who were the persons responsible for these gross abuses of human rights?

In its Second Interim Report, the Commission of Enquiry regarding the
Prevention of Public Violence and Intimidation (The "Goldstone
Commission") made the following finding - among others - concerning the
causes of the violence in Kwa-Zullu/Natal:

" As far as political violence is concerned, the Commission has no doubt
at all that both African National Congress and Inkatha Freedom Party
members and supporters have been guilty of many incidents that have
resulted in the deaths of and injuries to large numbers of people. Both
organisations have been over-hasty in accusing the other of being the
cause of such conduct. Each has been tardy, especially at the level of
top leadership, in taking adequate and effective steps to stop the
violence by imposing discipline and accountability among its membership.
The investigations of the Commission thus far do not enable it to
apportion blame, even if that dubious exercise were relevant."

In its third interim report of 22 December 1992 the Commission found that
whatever the role of the security forces might have been

" ? it remains clear that a primary trigger of current violence and
intimidation remains the rivalry between, and the fight for territory and
the control thereof by, the Inkatha Freedom Party and the African
National Congress."

On 4 May 1992 at Pietermaritzburg an ANC leader, Mr R Radebe, addressed a
crowd stating inter alia:

"The S A Police and Inkatha are the perpetrators of the

violence, they are our enemies.

We will kill the S A Police

We will kill the SADF.

We will kill the KwaZulu Police.

We will kill all our enemies".

The ANC and others are now attempting to dismiss all the violence that
occurred in the conflict between various black groupings, including its
struggle against the IFP, as the result of "Third Force" activities. This
is patently absurd.

We demand that all these gross abuses of human rights should be
investigated with the same zeal and thoroughness that the Commission is
devoting to its investigations of the former government and security
forces.




QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY THE COMMISSION IN ITS LETTER OF 12 DECEMBER 1996

I have now had the opportunity of studying the questions that you
submitted to me under your letter of 12 December 1996. Before I deal with
them - in as far as I can - I should like to make the following
observations:

* I strongly disagree with the contention in the first paragraph of
  your letter that it is "impossible and inadvisable to distinguish
  between the role of the NP per se and the NP as government." There are,
  in fact, significant differences between Party and State. Although the
  latter is guided by the general policy of the former, formulation and
  implementation of operational policy is often in the hands of
  operatives of the latter - who may or may not be the Party's members or
  supporters. Indeed, we strongly object to the practice of the our
  political opponents and elements of the media of automatically charging
  the National Party with responsibility for all the abuses committed by
  individuals employed by the former Government. In contrast with the
  blatant politicisation of the public service and the security forces
  that is now taking place, the National Party adhered to the principle
  of the neutrality of these institutions. Many of the perpetrators of
  abuses who are now involved in hearings have never been members or
  supporters of our Party. Some of them were strongly opposed to the
  National Party and especially to the reforms that led to the 1994
  elections.


We wish to make the following perfectly clear: the National Party is
prepared to accept responsibility for the policies that it adopted and
for the actions taken by its office bearers in the implementation of
those policies. It is, however, not prepared to accept responsibility for
the criminal actions of a handful of operatives of the security forces of
which the Party was not aware and which it would never have condoned.
Neither is it prepared to accept responsibility for the actions of any
office bearer who might have acted outside the mandate given him or her
by the Party.

Just as I have already stated in this, as well as my previous submission,
that in no cabinet meeting decisions were taken to authorise gross
violations of human rights, likewise no decisions were ever taken by the
National Party in any of its party political structures to support gross
violations of human rights. This is in stark contrast to the ANC and its
allies which adopted specific policies in its meetings, knowing full well
that these would definitely lead to gross violations of the human rights
of the civilian population.

* The distinctions that I made in my submission between the various
  historic stages through which the National Party developed are also of
  importance. It would not only be wrong and unfair to associate the
  National Party of today with the actions and attitudes of the National
  Party of 1948 - it would also be an unwarranted intrusion by the
  Commission in the current democratic process. The Commission must take
  note of the fact that the National Party of today is now supported by
  millions of South Africans from every community, black, coloured, white
  and Indian. This includes, since the early 'eighties many white South
  Africans who totally rejected and had absolutely nothing to do with
  apartheid. It is important that the Commission should be aware of these
  distinctions and that it should avoid any pronouncements that might
  draw itself into the party political arena.


* I am disturbed by the tone of some of the questions. They seem to
  indicate that the Commission has already made up its mind about the
  nature of the conflict of the past and feeds the perception that it has
  chosen sides. Some of the questions betray a simplistic approach to the
  enormously complex historical, political and moral questions involved
  in the conflict. In our submission we tried to identify some of these
  complexities.


* Many of the questions have already been answered to the best of our
  ability in our initial submission - particularly those that deal with
  the matters referred to in Question 1.


* A number of other questions presuppose that we still have access to
  all the relevant documentation and records. This is not the case and
  such questions should accordingly be referred to the relevant
  line-function departments or the parties that submitted statements.
  This is particularly the case with the following questions:


Questions of a general kind and those arising from the National Party
submission - Question 1.

Questions arising from the submissions of other parties - Question 5.

Questions on the SADF and other security services - Questions 6 and 7.

Involvement of the SADF in domestic politics and security - Questions 3 -
6

The CCB - Questions 1 and 4.

Cross border raids - Question 2.

Support to Guerrilla movements in neighbouring countries - Questions 1 -
4.





QUESTIONS ON MOTIVES, CONTEXT AND PERSPECTIVE

Question 1

Most of our first submission was devoted to providing answers to the
queries that you have raised in this question. The development of our
"underlying ideology" is dealt with from pages 3 - 10 of our submission.

In brief, the central theme of the history of the Afrikaans people,
almost since its arrival at the Cape has been its wish to rule itself; to
defend its right to religious freedom and to maintain and develop its own
cultural heritage and identity. It was this desire that led to its first
clashes with the Dutch East India Company and, after the arrival of the
British, motivated a large part of its people to migrate from the Cape
Colony into the interior. It was this desire that led the Afrikaners to
establish their own independent republics in the Transvaal and the Orange
Free State and twice to defend their independence - at enormous cost -
against the mightiest imperial power of the time. After its defeat at the
beginning of this century, it was this desire that led Afrikaners to
rebuild their people, to nurture their young language and culture; and to
regain their right to full national self-determination, embodied in the
ideal of the re-establishment of a Republic.

The National Party was founded in the second decade of this century to
act as the political vehicle for the realisation of these goals. Its
election victory in 1948 enabled it to implement its programme, which
culminated in the establishment of a Republic in 1961.

As far as relations with the other peoples of South Africa were
concerned, the National Party believed initially that its interests could
be best served by following a policy of "separateness" - or apartheid. It
felt that, only in this manner, would the whites in general - and
Afrikaners in particular - avoid being overwhelmed by the numerical
superiority of the black peoples of our country. Only in this manner
would they be able to maintain their own identity and their right to rule
themselves. It persuaded itself that such a policy was morally defensible
and in the interest of the other peoples of South Africa, because any
other course would inevitably lead to inter-racial conflict.

As I pointed out in my submission, the National Party's views and
policies were not static and developed markedly over the years as
circumstances in South Africa and the world changed. The history of the
National Party since 1948 can be divided into a number of periods:

* the first period of rigid apartheid, between 1948 and 1960, which was
  marked by the adoption of comprehensive segregation and security
  legislation and by the campaign for the establishment of a republic.
  This period was characterised by a determination to implement the
  Party's cultural, social and political/ agenda; by strict
  anti-Communism; and by a paternalistic approach to the other peoples of
  South Africa which was a reflection of the racial attitudes that
  prevailed at that time throughout much of the European dominated world
  and in the southern states of the United States. By the early 'fifties,
  the strict racial segregation that the National Party had inherited
  from the past, had been firmly institutionalised. Those in the Black
  community - such as the ANC and the Congress Movement - who were
  demanding full democratic rights - were regarded as agitators and
  communist revolutionaries.


* the second period of apartheid - or separate development - between
  1960 and 1978, during which the Government attempted to achieve a
  constitutional settlement through the establishment and development of
  black national states and also during which South Africa experienced
  growing international isolation. As I mentioned in my submission this
  approach was not without idealism:


"We thought that we could solve the complex problems that confronted us
by giving each of the ten distinguishable black South African nations
self-government and independence within the core areas that they had
traditionally occupied. In this way we would create a commonwealth of
South African states - each independent, but all co-operating on a
confederal basis with one another within an economic common market.

The underlying principle of territorial partition to assure
self-determination for different peoples living in a common area is
widely accepted. It was inter alia the basis for the creation of the
nation states that emerged from the Austro-Hungarian Empire after the
First World War, and for modern Pakistan and India after the Second World
War. Today, complex ethnic maps are the basis for the peace proposals in
Israel/Palestine and Bosnia.

Although we were primarily concerned with maintaining our own right to
self-determination, it would be a mistake to think that there was not a
strong element of idealism in this vision. Ten capital cities were built
in the ten states that had been identified, each with its own parliament,
quite impressive government buildings and bureaucracy. Several well
endowed universities were founded - which were formerly dismissed as
"bush colleges" - but which are now accepted as fully fledged
universities. By 1975 some 77 new towns had been established and 130 204
new houses had been built. Between 1952 and 1972 the number of hospital
beds in the homelands increased from some 5 000 to 34 689. Decentralised
industries were developed and hundreds of millions of rands were pumped
into the traditional areas in a futile attempt to stem the flood of
people to the supposedly "white" cities.

* the period of reform between 1978 and 1990, during which most of the
  revolutionary conflict took place, much of the apartheid system was
  dismantled, the electoral base was broadened, and negotiations were
  initiated. After the manifest failure of separate development, the main
  focus in the National Party shifted toward the search for alternative
  constitutional models that would enable those who held power to
  accommodate the social, economic and political realities that
  confronted them without sacrificing the right of white South Africans
  and other minorities to continue to manage and decide on what was
  referred to as "own affairs". In security affairs the main concern was
  to protect the state from a concerted national and international
  revolutionary onslaught. In my first submission I commented as follows
  on this period:


"From as early as 1978 the National Party began with its own tentative
process of reform - starting with the important labour reforms that
emerged from the recommendations of the Wiehahn Commission.


By the late seventies it was accepted that adequate constitutional
provision would also have to be made for the coloured and Indian
communities which did not have any identifiable homelands. The
President's Council was established to look into this and other
constitutional questions. Their recommendations ultimately led to the
adoption of the tricameral constitution in 1983 in terms of which white,
coloured and Indian South Africans were given the opportunity of electing
their own houses of Parliament and of administering their 'own affairs',
while power was shared with regard to matters of common interest."

By the end of 1986 the National Party Government had repealed some 100
discriminatory laws, including many laws such as the Pass Laws that had
constituted cornerstones of the policy of apartheid.

By 1987 it had established fully representative black local authorities.
In 1988 nation-wide elections were held for black local authorities.

I added in my submission that


"This new direction was given further definition at the 1986 congress of
the National Party which officially accepted 'one citizenship for all
South Africans' and the implication that 'any discrimination on the
ground of colour, race and cultural affiliation or religion' would have
to be eliminated. However, the Party still believed that political rights
should be exercised on a group basis. One of the points of departure for
its 1987 programme of action was the continued protection of group
rights: ' This must be done on the basis of the maximum degree of
self-determination for each group, and joint responsibility on matters of
common interest, in such a way that the domination of one group over
others be eliminated.' During the national elections of 1987 the National
Party sought, and was granted, a mandate by the electorate to pursue and
implement such a constitutional programme.

* the transformation period since 2 February 1990, during which the
  National Party took the decision to initiate inclusive constitutional
  negotiations; the political situation in South Africa was normalised;
  and the remaining apartheid legislation was repealed. During this
  period the National Party reconstituted itself, opened its membership
  to South Africans of all races and took its place as one of the New
  South Africa's fully multi-racial and democratic parties. As I pointed
  out in my first submission:


"By the end of the1980's it had become evident that the only possible
solution to the constitutional impasse lay in negotiations between all
South Africa's major parties, aimed at the establishment of a
fully-inclusive non-racial democracy. This was a difficult and
far-reaching decision for those in power - and especially for Afrikaner
nationalists":


* It meant that they would have to give up the right to alone govern
  those parts of the country where they had exercised power and that they
  considered to be theirs, for which they, as a small people, had
  struggled for hundreds of years. No other nation in the world has ever
  voluntarily made such a decision. Nonetheless the majority of white
  South Africans did so.

* "It meant that instead of putting their faith in their own
  institutions and in their own ability to defend themselves, they now
  had to put their trust in negotiated constitutional agreements. They
  did so in a continent that was not renowned for the success of its
  constitutional experiments.

* It meant that they would have to reach agreement with parties that
  they had little reason to trust. The SACP had, for example, made it
  clear that it viewed negotiations simply as the first strategic step in
  a two-phase revolution which would culminate in the establishment of a
  communist state.


After I became State President in 1989 I took the following steps to
normalise the political situation in South Africa further:

1. On 2 February 1990 I made announcements that opened the road to
   inclusive constitutional negotiations. These announcements included
   the unbanning of the ANC, the SACP and other organisations and the
   release of prisoners, including Mr Nelson Mandela.

2. During the following months and years the Government repealed all
   the remaining 'apartheid era' laws, including the Group Areas Act, the
   Population Registration Act, the Reservation of Separate Amenities
   Act, the Development of Black Communities Act and the Land Acts.

3. The National Party subsequently played a leading and indispensable
   role in the negotiations and the transformation process that led to
   the establishment of the new South Africa. It was the only major party
   that did not at some time or other walk out of the talks.

4. I also took steps to normalise and regularise the activities of the
   security forces (further details of my actions in this regard are set
   out below)."


The factors that motivated those who fought on the Government's side are
dealt with quite explicitly in pages 10 - 13 of the submission.

Firstly, one of the main motivating factors was the determination of many
whites - and especially Afrikaners - to defend what they saw as their
historic right to national self-determination:

"Many of those who took part in the struggle from the side of the
Government, especially most of the Afrikaners, believed, to start with,
that they were defending the right of their people to national
self-determination in their own state within a territorially partitioned
South Africa. They believed that their actions were in line, not only
with the traditions of their forefathers, but also with the universally
accepted principle that nations were entitled to defend their right to
self-determination. As the impracticality of this vision became more and
more evident during the eighties its importance as a motivating factor
diminished for most Afrikaans members of the National Party. It
nevertheless remains, to this day, the ideal of a significant proportion
of Afrikaners who support the Freedom Front, the Conservative Party and
various right-wing organisations."

Secondly, many of those who fought on the side of the Government did so
because of their perception that they were defending their country
against the global onslaught of totalitarian and atheistic Communism:

"Those who fought on the side of the Government believed that they were
defending their country against what they perceived to be the aggressive
expansion of Soviet communism. They had ample reason to believe this. The
Sixth Congress of the Communist International had resolved, as early as
1928, that


' The CPSA (Communist Party of South Africa) should pay particular
attention to the ANC. Our aim should be to transform the ANC into a
fighting nationalist revolutionary organisation.'"

From the sixties onwards, the ANC received substantial aid from the
Soviet Union and its East European satellites. It was closely allied to -
some would say dominated by - the South African Communist Party. The SACP
was, in turn, one of the most Stalinist and supinely pro-Soviet parties
in the world. Among other actions, it had enthusiastically supported the
Soviet invasions of Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan. The Soviet
threat was not simply McCarthyite paranoia on the part of the South
African Government. The reality was that SACP members held dominant
positions within the ANC's National Executive Committee and that Soviet
surrogate forces had established strong positions in a number of Southern
African countries, particularly in Angola. In September 1987 Soviet and
Cuban-led MPLA forces clashed with UNITA and SADF forces at the Lomba
River in southern Angola in what was probably the largest set-piece
battle in the continent since the Battle of El Alamein.

The SACP's agenda was to use its vanguard position in the ANC led
alliance to promote a two-phase revolution. According to a policy
document produced by the SACP politburo in May 1986

"? the immediate attainment of the socialist revolution is not on the
agenda. This does not mean that we are putting it off but, to quote
Lenin's words, we 'are taking the first steps towards it in the only
possible way, along the only correct path, namely the path of a
democratic republic.'''

The perception of those on the side of the Government was accordingly
that the installation of an ANC Government would lead to communist
domination. They believed that in conducting their struggle against the
ANC, they were playing an important role in the West's global resistance
to the expansion of Soviet Communism."

Thirdly, many of those who fought on the side of the Government were
motivated by their perceived duty to defend the State and to maintain law
and order:

"Many of those who fought on the side of the security forces,
particularly national servicemen and reservists, often did so without any
specific ideological or party political motive. They believed that it was
their duty to carry out the lawful instructions of a legally constituted
and internationally recognised government. They also believed that they
had an underlying and non-party political responsibility to uphold the
law and to protect the lives and property of citizens.

Millions of South Africans who opposed apartheid also condemned the use
of violence to achieve political objectives. Newspapers in South Africa
which were strenuous opponents of apartheid often supported cross-border
actions by the security forces in cases where perpetrators sought refuge
in neighbouring states after murdering civilians in South Africa.

The great majority of those who served in the security forces during the
conflict were honourable, professional and dedicated men and women. They
were convinced that their cause was just, necessary and legitimate."



Question 2

The manner in which you have phrased your question creates the impression
that the Commission has already reached its own conclusions on these
important matters.

Non-violent and constitutional change

You ask how one achieves power constitutionally if one is disenfranchised
and denied many of one's basic constitutional rights? The answer is that,
in the end, all of the people were empowered and enfranchised through
negotiations and a peaceful constitutional process - and not as a result
of violent conflict.

The armed and violent dimension of the ANC's strategy was not a major
factor in the transformation of South Africa. It was unnecessary and
counter-productive and served only to intensify the cycle of brutality
and bitterness on all sides. Furthermore it delayed the process which led
to the enfranchisement and empowerment of the people.

There was a vigorous debate within the ranks of the ANC at the beginning
of the 1960's on this very question. Many of the organisation's most
respected leaders - including Chief Albert Luthuli - were opposed to the
use of violence. There is also no indication that the majority of black
South Africans ever supported the ANC's decision to embark on its armed
struggle.

The fact is that many disenfranchised peoples have successfully secured
constitutional rights through non-violent and/or broadly constitutional
means. This was the case, most notably in India and in much of Africa. It
was also the method that brought about the extension of the suffrage in
countries such as the United Kingdom. It is a great pity that the ANC and
its allies opposed so resolutely the genuine reform measures adopted by
the Government from the end of the 1970's. The ANC's approach that
apartheid could not be reformed and that the "apartheid regime" had to be
destroyed undoubtedly played a major role in promoting intransigence on
both sides during the conflict.

Many black South Africans with impeccable qualifications believed that
they could best advance the cause of their people through peaceful means.
Others, equally sincere, felt that rights for black South Africans could
best be secured by working within the structures provided by the
Government. The homeland governments, local authorities and the
tricameral Parliament all provided - or could have provided - a base for
the initiation of far-reaching peaceful and evolutionary constitutional
change. Even President Mandela acknowledges that it was sometimes
acceptable to work within in the system - and gave tacit approval to some
leaders who had done so by subsequently appointing them to senior
positions in the ANC.

Despite ANC propaganda that they were "puppets", homeland governments
enjoyed a very high degree of real autonomy and the Independent States
were constitutionally independent. They controlled budgets that were
larger than those of many independent African states. Some leaders, like
Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, used these institutions to fight apartheid
and to press for the ideal of a non-racial South Africa and, by so-doing
played an important part in the transformation process. If the ANC and
its allies had decided to encourage candidates sympathetic to its cause
to contest the elections for the tricameral Parliament, they could have
established another powerful platform for the constitutional promotion of
their cause. Their decision, instead, to launch a campaign of mass
defiance through their surrogates in the UDF and the Mass Democratic
Movement, signalled the beginning of the most serious phase in our
national conflict.

As far as I am aware, the Chairman of the Commission never supported
violence as a means to achieving constitutional rights - yet no-one would
question the very great contribution that he had made by following
peaceful and constitutional methods.

The point that we wished to make in our first submission was that
-although one might understand the motivation of those who embarked on a
policy of armed insurrection - there is a very real question as to
whether this was an effective or correct option. Undoubtedly, it
contributed to the spiral of violence and to the intensity of the
conflict.

On pages 20 -25 of my submission I listed the complex factors that
ultimately contributed to the transformation of South Africa. These
factors included the roles played by the international community, by
peaceful opposition within South Africa, by the collapse of Soviet
Communism, by changes within the National Party and by socio-economic
changes. The most significant of these were the socio-economic changes:

"During the twenty-five years between 1970 and 1995 there were dramatic -
but largely unpublicised - shifts in socio-economic relationships in
South Africa which led to the de facto and ultimately to the de jure
transformation of South Africa:

* Influx control was abolished by the reality of millions of people
  migrating to the cities, long before the relevant legislation was
  repealed by Parliament.

* The Group Areas Act was abolished de facto by the reality that
  thousands of black South Africans had peacefully moved into supposedly
  white areas.

* The Separate Amenities legislation was doomed from the moment that
  young black and white people with the same qualifications began working
  side by side in banks, shops and factories.


There is nothing new in this. Much of history has been the story of how
changing economic relationships have led to changed social relationships.
Ultimately these changed relationships placed irresistible pressure on
antiquated constitutional relationships and led to the emergence of
democratic societies."


The legality of the South African Government and its international
isolation

It is a matter of fact that South Africa was "legally constituted and
internationally recognised" throughout this period - even though the
"legitimacy" of this Government was increasingly questioned. Throughout
this period South Africa remained a member of the United Nations and its
ambassadors were accepted by the UN Secretary-General and regularly
participated in the deliberations of the UN Security Council. The South
African Government was also recognised as a sovereign government by the
governments of most of the leading countries of the world.

The International Convention that purported to declare apartheid to be a
"crime against humanity"

The International Convention that purported to declare apartheid to be a
"crime against humanity" was little more than a mobilisation exercise by
the ANC and its totalitarian and Third World supporters in the UN General
Assembly. It was never adopted or approved by the Security Council, as
you incorrectly state. It is significant that few genuine democracies
ever supported the Convention. On the other hand, many states - including
the Soviet Union, its satellites and the People's Republic of China -
that themselves were guilty of the most horrendous crimes against
humanity - were signatories. It is significant that throughout this
period Freedom House - a widely respected human rights organisation in
New York - consistently reported that black South Africans had greater
civil and political rights (seriously restricted though these were) than
the citizens of most of South Africa's East Bloc and African critics.

"Crimes against humanity" are generally associated with the wilful
extermination of hundreds of thousands - and sometimes millions - of
people, as occurred during the Holocaust; the rule of Josef Stalin; the
"Great Leap Forward" in China; and the recent genocide in Rwanda. Without
wishing to detract from the humiliation, hardship and disruption caused
by apartheid policies, they are not in any way comparable with these
situations. Victims of "crimes against humanity" do not generally achieve
sustained population growth rates of more than 3% and their social and
socio-economic statistics do not improve across the board. There is
generally not a major shift of national income in their favour and they
do not usually benefit from a marked increase in their share of the
social budget at the expense of their so-called "oppressors". As I
pointed out in my first submission:

"According to the propaganda of our opponents, the apartheid years were
characterised by the unbridled exploitation of black South Africans by
whites. However, in the period between 1975 and 1987 white South Africans
share of social benefits declined from 56% to 35% of the total, while
their contribution to total personal taxes declined by only 5% from 77%
to 72%. According to a study by the International Monetary Fund in
January 1992, white South Africans in 1987 paid an average of 32,03% of
their incomes in tax, but received only 9% back in benefits."

As I also pointed out in my first submission;

* Despite widespread criticism of the education policies of the former
  government, the proportion of the total black population attending
  school rose from 8,05% in 1950 to 19,8% in 1975. Since then expenditure
  on the education of all South Africans has risen dramatically: By
  1993/94 it was R27,26 billion, representing 21,4% of the budget and
  7,3% of GDP - one of the highest figures in the world. 74% of the
  school budget was allocated to coloured, Indian and black schools.


* Between 1989 and 1993 black university enrolment increased by 47%. By
  1993 black students represented 32% of all enrolments - compared with
  54% for Whites. There were 41 342 black technicon students and 41 343
  trainee teachers. Despite the disruption of black education and despite
  the low pass rates, more than 150 000 black scholars passed matric in
  1992, compared with 64 000 whites.


* During the period between 1970 and 1995 the black share of personal
  income increased from 19,8% to a projected 37,3%, while the white share
  fell during the same period from 71.1% to a projected 48,5%.


* By the end of the eighties black South Africans had begun to move
  into a dominant position in many sectors of the consumer market. By
  1989 they bought more stoves, fridges, televisions, hi-fi's, furniture
  suites, crockery, curtaining and linen than whites.


* By the early nineties there were an estimated 625 000 small
  businesses in the black informal sector of the economy. According to
  some reports, the sector had created about 3,5 million jobs, of which
  almost 500 000 had the potential of being transferred to the formal
  sector.


* During the last years of National Party Government rule we made
  genuine and serious efforts to remove racial differentials in all
  spheres. We equalised the salaries of all state officials. By 1993
  old-age pensioners of all races were receiving equal pensions."


According to media reports, some elements within the ANC are now
insisting that there can be no reconciliation unless those involved on
the side of the former Government first acknowledge that "apartheid" was
a "crime against humanity". This is accompanied by increasingly strident
calls for the prosecution of people involved in the conflict of the past
on the Government side. This approach is completely at odds with the
requirements for reconciliation, even-handedness and amnesty set out in
the transitional constitution. It is a sure recipe for the rekindling of
inter-racial animosity.


International Isolation

It is true that South Africa was increasingly isolated in the
international community. It is also true that the pressure for further
isolation mounted as the South African Government began to introduce
reforms. For example, the very significant labour reforms that were
introduced at the end of the seventies after the publication of the
Wiehahn Reports, were viciously condemned and rejected by the ANC's
allies at the United Nations. The reason is that they were resolutely
opposed to reform ("apartheid cannot be reformed") and were
single-mindedly committed to the total revolutionary destruction of the
State.

The sanctions and isolation campaigns caused enormous hardships for
millions of South Africans and probably acted more to retard the process
of change than they did to accelerate it. Reliable opinion surveys
consistently indicated that a majority of black South Africans were
opposed to sanctions. One of the main engines of change was, and remains,
economic growth and the socio-economic development that it always brings.


Was apartheid morally defensible?

You ask, whether in retrospect, we agree that apartheid is morally
indefensible. Once again, you do not appear to have read our submission.
We have not argued that apartheid is morally defensible. However, it is
surely morally defensible for a people to struggle to maintain their
right to national self-determination, but not at the expense of the human
rights of others - and this is what apartheid came to signify. Although -
as I stated on page 7 of my submission, there was originally a strong
element of idealism in separate development and although many positive
developments occurred - the policy was a dismal failure. On pages 9 - 10,
we state quite clearly that

"Instead of providing a just and workable solution, it led to hardship,
suffering and humiliation - to institutionalised discrimination on the
basis of race and ethnicity. Instead of promoting peaceful inter-group
relations, it precipitated a cycle of widespread resistance and
repression in which unacceptable actions were committed by all sides.
Instead of providing a solution, it had led to injustice, growing
international isolation and to the escalation of the conflict that had
been smouldering since the early sixties."

On page 28 I reiterated my apology "for the pain cause by former policies
of the National Party." Clearly, it is neither my wish nor intention to
furnish a moral defence of apartheid. Indeed, my own presidency was
dedicated primarily to continuing the abolition of apartheid and the
democratic transformation of South Africa. What I sought to do in my
submission was to explain the circumstances which gave rise to the policy.


The equation of the struggle against apartheid with the struggle to
defend it

You ask whether one can legitimately equate the struggle against
apartheid with the struggle to defend it? It could be argued that in
putting this question you are betraying your prejudice and a simplistic
approach to your mandate. The question, as formulated, actually suggests
that all those who fought on the side of the Government, whatever their
motivation and actions, should be placed in an inferior moral position to
all those who fought against the Government, whatever their motivations
or actions. The question also assumes, quite incorrectly, that all those
who fought on the Government side were doing so in the defence of
"apartheid". Very few of those involved were fighting to repress fellow
South Africans or to maintain the segregated facilities associated with
apartheid. As I have pointed out above, those who fought on the
government side were motivated by a number of factors, including their
determination to maintain their right to national self-determination;
their commitment to resist the expansion of global communism; and their
duty to defend individuals and the state and to uphold law and order. All
these factors are, in my opinion, legitimate and had nothing to do with
racism or apartheid per se.

The answer to your question accordingly depends entirely on the
circumstances involved. A black policeman going about his duty,
protecting the lives and property of his neighbours undoubtedly had a
more moral cause than the activists who burned him - and many like him -
to death by tying a tyre to his neck with barbed wire, filling it with
petrol and setting him on fire. Civic organisations, demonstrating
peacefully in support of their rights undoubtedly had a more moral cause
than maverick elements in the security forces who committed brutal crimes
to suppress them. Those advocating peaceful change and promoting
democratic reform within the Government were in my opinion, morally
superior to members of the South African Communist Party who were
plotting to impose a socialist dictatorship through armed insurrection in
South Africa.

It is the Commission's onerous task to delve into such circumstances and
establish, in as far as it can, the truth. It is not part of its mandate
- and it will certainly not promote reconciliation - if it attempts to
brand all those on one side as morally inferior and all those on the
other as morally superior.


Question 3

Although it cannot be expected of me to account directly for the first
two periods of the National Party Government I tried, in my first
submission, to sketch some of the main factors involved during these
periods. In this regard, please refer to my comments on the first and
second periods of the National Party above.

Question 4

The cultural organisations, the academics, the Afrikaans churches and the
Broederbond all played greater or lesser roles in the formulation of the
policy of apartheid and in subsequent reform initiatives. However, I have
no mandate to act as a spokesman for these organisations. If you believe
that they possess information that is relevant to your mandate I suggest
that you invite them to speak for themselves.

QUESTIONS OF A GENERAL KIND AND THOSE ARISING FROM THE NATIONAL PARTY
SUBMISSION


Question 1

As I stated on page 2 of my submission, the information that I provided
related primarily to my own presidency. I warned that I would not be able
to speak with the same authority with regard to developments that fall
outside of this framework. I am accordingly not in a position to provide
detailed information and statistics on all the periods during which the
NP was in office. Nor am I able to provide you with the statistics that
you request concerning the prosecution of members of the security forces
for serious violations of human rights from 1960 to 1994. I simply do not
possess this information and suggest that you approach the government
authorities in this regard.

The question as to whether the Government devoted the same resources to
investigating human rights abuses by the security forces as it did to the
National Security Management System and to the pursuit "f anti-Apartheid
perpetrators" is disingenuous. Pages 26 and 27 of my submission provide
the following information on the far-reaching steps that I took -
including the abolition of the National Management System - to normalise
the role of the security forces and to investigate allegations of human
rights abuses:

* "Soon after my inauguration I gave instructions for the investigation
  of all secret and covert operations of the security forces with a view
  to their possible termination. By March 1990 a number of such
  operations had been phased out.


* On the 10th January 1990 I addressed some 800 senior police officers
  and told them that it was their duty to be absolutely impartial; that
  they should refrain from any political involvement; and that they
  should restrict themselves to combating crime and protecting the lives
  and property of all South Africans. On the 7th March 1990, I repeated
  the same exercise with senior officers of the South African Defence
  Force.


* In February 1990 I appointed the Harms Commission to investigate
  certain alleged murders.


* On 9 July 1990 the Government announced the final termination of the
  National Security Management System, and also drastically scaled down
  the role of the State Security Council.


* The management of covert operations was further reviewed after
  receipt of the report of the Harms Commission.


* I appointed a committee under chairmanship of Prof. E Khan to advise
  on the desirability of all secret projects and to recommend on the
  phasing out, where possible, of such projects. Part of its brief was to
  advise me of the adequacy of existing control measures.


* I appointed a standing commission (The Goldstone Commission) to
  investigate incidents of public violence


* In November 1992 I appointed General Pierre Steyn to investigate
  allegations made to the Goldstone Commission with regard to activities
  of the Directorate of Covert Collection of Military Intelligence.


These steps - and particularly the reports of the Goldstone Commission -
were instrumental in uncovering many of the abuses that have now come
before the Courts and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. However,
the Goldstone Commission consistently found that abuses had been
committed by all sides in the conflict."


Question 2

As far as I was involved, information was obtained from more than one of
our intelligence services. In the case of the Umtata raid it was based on
extensive surveillance that had indicated that the target was, indeed, an
APLA base. This was, according to the reports that I received,
substantiated by two independent police sources.

Such errors as were made in the execution of cross-border raids may, no
doubt, be ascribed to the exigencies of each specific case. I suggest
that the Commission approach the security forces involved for further
elucidation in this regard. My suggestions regarding the allocation of
responsibility are clearly set out on page 26 of my submission as follows:

"Responsibility should be attributed

1. to Cabinet for all decisions which it took and the instructions
   that it issued, including all authorised actions and operations
   executed in terms of a reasonable interpretation of such instructions;


1. to the State Security Council on the same basis applicable to
   Cabinet, as set out above;


1. to individual ministers for all decisions taken by them personally
   in their ministerial capacity, including all authorised actions and
   operations executed in terms of a reasonable interpretation of
   instructions issued by them in the process;


1. to the commanding officers attached to the security forces on the
   same basis applicable to individual ministers, as set out above.


I furthermore submit that these guidelines could, mutatis mutandis, be
applied to other parties, organisations or institutions."


Question 3

In terms of the criteria that I identified on page 17 of my submission,
it would be the responsibility of whatever body might be involved -
either the courts or the TRC - to determine whether the person concerned
acted legally or illegally. If the person acted illegally, a
determination should then be made whether his or her actions constituted
a bona fide interpretation of orders; or whether he or she acted mala
fides. The question of ultimate responsibility is dealt with quite
clearly on pages 25 and 26 of my submission, which I have quoted in my
reply to question 2 above.


Question 4

Full information can, no doubt, be obtained from the security forces;
from court records and from the media. We assume that the Commission is
already actively investigating many of these incidents.

The National Party will, in due course, be making a further submission to
the TRC with regard to a number of incidents that we believe require
special attention.


Question 5

As I stated on page 16 of my submission " I have never been part of any
decision taken by Cabinet, the State Security Council, or any committee
authorising or instructing the commission of ? gross violations of human
rights." And yet there is now ample evidence that gross violations of
human rights were committed by elements of the security forces.

As I have stated above, the overwhelming majority of the members of the
National Party have been horrified by the revelations of human rights
abuses committed by some elements within the security forces during the
conflict. They also want to know how these abuses could have happened and
why they were not detected long before their public exposure.

The fact that we were unaware of such incidents may be ascribed to the
following factors:

* As has already been stated in my submission, the perpetration of
  human rights abuses was never discussed or approved at any meeting of
  the Cabinet, or the State Security Council or any other government
  forum that I ever attended.


* On the contrary, the Cabinet approved guidelines for the conducting
  of unavoidable secret operations which we thought would have eliminated
  the possibility of such abuses. These guidelines, which were adopted by
  the Cabinet on 29 June 1990, inter alia made provision for the
  following:


* that the operations should be undertaken only when normal
  line-function activities of departments are not sufficient, or when
  they are considered to be a necessary supplement to such activities;


* that the political head and the officials involved in special
  projects accept full accountability for such actions with which they
  were involved;


* that approval for the principle, purpose and objectives, methods and
  funds must be given in writing by the responsible Minister. The
  Minister should himself determine to what extent he wishes to be
  informed of details;


* that the principle of plausible denial should wherever possible be
  avoided;


* that no indemnity from criminal prosecution could be granted to
  anyone;


* that the auditing of expenditure from the relevant account for
  special operations or covert programmes should occur in terms of
  Auditor-General's Act, 1989 (No 52 of 1989)taking into account, in
  particular, articles 5(9) and 6(3); and


* that the minimum number of people should be informed with regard to
  special operations and covert projects (the "need to know" principle).


* During the State of Emergency that was declared on 12 June 1986, the
  Department of Justice used its Legal Centre to ensure that all actions
  taken by the Government in the course of the State of Emergency were in
  accordance with the law. Ministers were aware of the Legal Centre and
  were confident that it would guard against abuses.


* Allegations surfaced from time to time in the media regarding the
  existence of a "third force". However no proof could be found of the
  existence of such a "third force" which was often dismissed as a
  construction of the ANC propaganda machine. Indeed, even with all the
  resources at his disposal, Judge Goldstone found it difficult to
  discern the existence of some or other coherent "third force". In its
  second interim report the Commission made the following comments
  concerning the existence of a "third force":


"The words 'third force' have been used by many people in South Africa in
many contexts and with no consistent meaning. The phrase has been used
frequently with reference to a sinister and secret organisation or group
that commits acts of violence in furtherance of some nefarious political
aim. Then, again, it was recently used by the President of the African
National Congress to describe the alleged activities of 32 Battalion, the
CCB, 'hit squads' and the police, i.e. identifiable groups or
organisations.

The Commission has received no evidence which would suggest that there is
a third force of the first type mentioned in 2.1, i.e. a sinister and
secret organisation orchestrating political violence on a wide front."

* Covert operations were carried out on a "need to know" basis.
  Evidently, those with knowledge of such actions sometimes consciously
  failed to inform their superiors of them, in terms of the doctrine of
  "plausible denial" (despite the rejection of this doctrine in terms of
  the above-mentioned Cabinet guidelines).


* As alluded to on page 17 of my submission, the possibility must also
  be accepted that some elements of the security forces might have been
  following their own agenda and were actively working against the
  transformation process. For obvious reasons such elements would not
  have informed their superiors of their activities.


Whenever I became aware of credible allegations of human rights abuses I
took active steps to have them investigated. I spelled out these steps on
pages 26 and 27 of my submission. These steps, included, inter alia, the
appointment of the Goldstone Commission.

I am in a better position to provide information on actions that were
taken to investigate and prevent abuses of human rights during my own
presidency, than I am with regard to the period before my presidency.

During the presidency of my predecessor, responsibility for security
matters was concentrated in the hands of the President, his security
ministers and the senior officers of the security forces. I accept that
you have taken this into account in formulating your questions to former
State President P W Botha and am sure that his replies will be helpful.

During this period the South African Police and the South African Defence
Force began to play an increasingly prominent and autonomous role - as
all security forces are, no doubt, inclined to do in situations of
national emergency. They had the main responsibility to counteract the
growing revolutionary threat. The Cabinet supported them in their
difficult task and accepted that they would act firmly, but within the
framework of the law, in carrying out their duties.

Ministers, like myself, who were not responsible for security and
directly related portfolios, were given broadly based briefings on the
security situation and participated in policy decisions of a general
nature. (This was actually the manner in which the Cabinet and Ministers
generally conducted their business. The detailed planning and
implementation of policies accepted by the Cabinet was the responsibility
of individual ministers.)

I can recall that human rights issues, such as deaths in detention, were
discussed in the Cabinet and the SSC from time to time. Such discussions
were always conducted in a spirit of acceptance of the principle that the
State should avoid gross violations of human rights and that it should
conduct itself within the framework of internationally accepted
guidelines.






Question 6

Once again, my views on the question of responsibility are clearly
spelled out on pages 26 and 27 of my first submission and are quoted
above. Minister Vlok will be in the best position to answer any
allegations concerning the degree to which he was, or was not, informed
about operational activities such as those involving Vlakplaas operations
and the bombing of Khotso House. I have no reason to believe that he was
party to anything more than that in respect of which he has applied for
amnesty.



Question 7

The Government never adopted a policy to promote "black-on-black"
violence. To my knowledge, such a policy was never discussed in the
Cabinet or the State Security Council or at any other meeting of any
other body that I attended. It has since come to light that some elements
within the security forces may have been involved in the fomentation of
"black-on-black" violence. It would, however, be ludicrous to suggest
that such actions were the prime cause - or even a major cause - of such
violence. Support for various organisations, such as Inkatha etc, that
were being threatened by the strategies and actions of those responsible
for the armed insurrection, should not be confused with support for
"black-on-black" violence.



Question 8

See pages 25 and 26 of my submission.


Question 9

The contention that you make is totally fallacious and does not
constitute a fair assumption at all. President Mandela, in his book "Long
Walk to Freedom" gives a good and honest description of the general
improvement in prison conditions that occurred over the years. Since I
joined the government I can recall steps were taken by the Government
from time to time to ensure that detainees would be treated properly and
to prevent the possibility of the abuses referred to in the question. In
particular, arrangements were made for regular visits by Magistrates.
Further information in this regard can no doubt be obtained from the
relevant departments.



Question 10

The Government declared a State of Emergency in response to the efforts
of the ANC and its allies to make South Africa ungovernable as the
prelude to violent revolution. Once again, you do not appear to have read
my submission in which I clearly stated that the objectives that were
identified at the time of the declaration of the State of Emergency were:

* the restoration of law and order and security;

* a return to normality in the unrest ravaged black residential area;
  and

* the creation of a climate in which constitutional change could take
  place.


I believe that, had the State of Emergency not succeeded in achieving
most of these goals, South Africa might have been plunged into a
devastating civil war. The relative stability that it brought and the
realisation by the ANC that there could be no revolutionary victory were
essential preludes to the negotiations that followed.


Question 11

I was not a member of the Cabinet in 1976 and am therefore not in a
position to comment on Minister Kruger's proposal, the Cabinet's
response, or the circumstances in which the discussion took place.



Question 12

I have no recollection of any decision ever having been taken during my
period in the Cabinet that would have favoured action that would have led
to "increased deaths". My colleagues and I would certainly have rejected
any such proposal.


Question 13

My statement reflected my views at the time of the preparation of my
submission as well as the views that were conveyed to me by as many of my
Cabinet colleagues as I could consult at the time. Mr Vlok and any other
members of former Cabinets should be allowed to speak for themselves.


Question 14

This question is more a contentious statement than a question.

Yet again, the Commission does not appear to have studied my submission.
I stated very clearly my views on the question of overall responsibility
on page 25 where I stated that:

"Obviously there rests an overall responsibility on the leadership of the
various parties, organisations and institutions which were part of the
conflict. I accept such overall responsibility in respect of the period
of my leadership. However, when it comes to specific incidents,
occurrences, deeds and transgressions it will be necessary to apply
specific guidelines."

I went on to suggest such guidelines, which I have quoted in full above.

I have also spelled out the National Party's views with regard to its own
responsibility for gross violations of human rights. I shall repeat them:

"The National Party, is prepared to accept responsibility for the
policies that it adopted and for the actions taken by its office bearers
in the implementation of those policies. It is, however, not prepared to
accept responsibility for the criminal actions of a handful of operatives
of the security forces of which the Party was not aware and which it
would never have condoned. Neither is it prepared to accept
responsibility for the actions of any office bearer who might have acted
outside the mandate given him by the Party."

Yet again I would also like to refer you to pages 26 and 27 of my
submission which contain a list of the steps that I took to normalise the
role of the security forces and to investigate allegations of gross
violations of human rights. You will note that one of my main priorities
after becoming State President was precisely to depoliticise the security
forces. As I pointed out on page 26 of my submission:

"On the 10th January 1990 I addressed some 800 senior police officers and
told them that it was their duty to be absolutely impartial; that they
should refrain from any political involvement; and that they should
restrict themselves to combating crime and protecting the lives and
property of all South Africans. On the 7th March 1990, I repeated the
same exercise with senior officers of the South African Defence Force."



QUESTIONS ARISING FROM THE SUBMISSIONS OF OTHER POLITICAL PARTIES

Question 1

As I stated on page 17 of my submission

"?the type of unconventional actions which were approved in principle by
the Cabinet and the State Security Council related to such issues as
information gathering, disinformation and assistance to outside
organisations opposed to the revolutionary forces." These were the type
of Stratcom operations that the Cabinet and the State Security Council
would have discussed and approved. I added that "?none of these projects
was intended to lead to any gross violation of human rights." Some would
also include the steps which were taken to neutralise international
sanctions as being part of Stratcom operations. I regard such activities
as having been an acceptable part of our overall strategy to counteract
the revolutionary threat - although I would not necessarily endorse all
such projects or the manner in which they were implemented.


Question 2

I was acutely aware of IFP charges that a large number of their leaders
had been killed by the ANC. I am not in possession of the IFP submission,
and thus not in a position to comment on the allegation that the
Government's security agencies co-operated with the ANC's Department of
Intelligence and Security. However, I am certainly not aware of any such
action that would have been intended to harm the interests of the IFP or
of any other party.


Question 3

I am not in possession of the IFP submission and therefore not in a
position to respond to the IFP charge. I do, however, recall the
memorandum. I think that it is highly unlikely that I would not have
responded to it, in view of the high regard that I have always had for Dr
Buthelezi and the regular discussions that we were conducting with him at
that time. In all probability the issue was dealt with orally during such
discussions.



Question 4

Such operations were not part of any security policy aimed at the gross
violation of human rights. Neither the Cabinet nor the State Security
Council or any other organ of the State that I ever attended, adopted
such policies.


Question 5

I am not aware of any special relationship between the security forces
and "right wing" para-military groups. Please refer in this regard to
page 11 above.


QUESTIONS ON THE SADF AND OTHER SECURITY STRUCTURES

The NSMS

Question 1

The main objective of the NSMS was to counteract the revolutionary
threat. I have provided a brief outline of the NSMS and its origins on
pages 14 and 15 of my submission:

"The prime purpose of the NMS was to ensure that all branches of
government responded in a co-ordinated manner to the revolutionary
threat. It was accepted that this threat could not be effectively - or
even primarily - countered by military or security action. The main
accent should instead fall on the provision of effective government and
social services and in promoting inclusive constitutional solutions."

I do not know whether any decision of any structure of the NSMS gave rise
to actions of an unlawful or unauthorised nature - apart from the fact
that no such decisions were ever taken at any meeting that I attended.
Further information with regard to the NSMS may be obtained from the
relevant government departments.

The NSMS was, by its nature, an extraordinary body that was set up to
deal with an extraordinary situation. I accordingly abolished it on 9
July 1990, after the revolutionary threat had waned and the negotiation
process had gained sufficient momentum.


State Security Council

Question 1

Not to my knowledge. All intelligence services maintain profiles of
people they suspect of unlawful activities. However, access to such
documents would be unwarranted unless there is prima facie evidence that
it is relevant to the Commission in respect of gross violations of human
rights.


Question 2

It has subsequently been revealed that some organs within the state
administration - such as the Vlakplaas Unit and the CCB - did act outside
the law. Such actions were, however, never authorised by the Cabinet, the
State Security Council or any other body which I ever attended. Indeed, I
was not even aware of the existence of the CCB until its activities were
exposed. I had heard of the Vlakplaas installation but was under the
impression that it was a facility for the reorientation of captured ANC
cadres who wished to work for the security forces.

I have been assured by General Van der Merwe, the former Commissioner of
the South African Police, that he was also not aware of such activities
and believe that his evidence to the Commission will bear this out.
Likewise, enquiries to other senior police generals also testified to the
fact that they were unaware of the atrocities planned and perpetrated
from Vlakplaas.

After investigations that I had initiated brought such activities to
light, I took appropriate steps to terminate the activities concerned.


Question 3

Yes, in 1985 and 1986 the Government did consider the possibility of
establishing a "Third Force" - but never in the sense that the ANC and
the media have attached to the term. The proposal was that a third
para-military force - separate from the SADF and the SAP - should be
created to deal specifically with unrest and counter-insurgency
operations.

The force would have been uniformed and overt and would have left the SAP
and the SADF free to continue with their proper line function activities.
Similar forces exist in a number of democratic countries - such as
France. After lengthy consideration the proposal was rejected by the
Government. As I recall, a decision was taken instead to establish an
internal stability unit within the SAP.

I cannot recall any decision by the SSC to authorise the security forces
to use the same methods as the revolutionaries to counteract the
revolutionary threat. I suggest that you peruse the records of the SSC in
this regard. If this did happen, it would certainly not have included
murder or assassination. It would also vindicate and not negate the
statement that I made in my submission that revolutionary strategies
adopted by the government's opponents were responsible for blurring "the
traditional distinctions between combatants and non-combatants; between
legitimate and illegitimate targets; and between acceptable and
unacceptable methods." Evidently, the blurring occurred on both sides,
but it was initiated by the revolutionaries.


Question 4

The GVS (Gesamentlike Veiligheidstaf) was responsible for the
co-ordination of counter-revolutionary actions. I am not in possession of
its records and suggest that you approach the relevant authorities for
the additional information that you require.

The words "uit te wis" mean "to wipe out". In the context in which you
quote the phrase it would probably mean the operational neutralisation of
terrorist units.

I suggest that you consult appropriate dictionaries and political
lexicons for a definition of "terroriste". The term relates to those who
use terror against civilians as a means of promoting their agenda. This
often includes the indiscriminate bombing of civilian targets and the
brutal intimidation and murder of political opponents to promote partisan
objectives.


Question 5

In any state structure anywhere in the world secret operations are
carried out on a "need to know" basis - otherwise they would obviously
not remain secret. This does not imply that they are illegal. I do not
possess the information on "need to know" projects that you require and
suggest that you approach the relevant authorities in this regard.

Questions 6 & 7

Please refer to page 11 above. Please also refer to my comments in my
first submission with regard to the activities of the Kahn Committee.


INVOLVEMENT OF THE SADF IN DOMESTIC POLITICS AND SECURITY

On pages 12 - 15 of my submission I spelled out the circumstances that
led to the politicisation of the role of the Security Forces and to their
involvement in civilian administration:

" The then Government believed that it was being confronted by a 'total
onslaught'. Its response was to develop its own 'total strategy'. The
need for such a total strategy was identified in a Government White Paper
on Defence in 1977 in the following terms:

' The process of ensuring and maintaining the sovereignty of a state's
authority in a conflict situation has, through the evolution of warfare,
shifted from the purely military to an integrated national action?.. the
resolution of conflict in the times in which we now live demands
interdependent and co-ordinated action in all fields - military,
psychological, economic, political, sociological, technological,
diplomatic, ideological, cultural etc'."


I also pointed out, on pages 26 and 27, and have repeated above, the
steps that I took after I became President to normalise their role.

The SADF did become involved in operations that went beyond the narrow
definition of security measures. They were inter alia involved in
community development projects and in strategic communication. Of course,
as part of the anti-revolutionary struggle, the SADF and the SAP were
involved in actions and operations to discredit the ANC and other
anti-apartheid organisations - just as the ANC and its allies were
involved in similar activities against the Government. These activities
did not constitute gross violations of human rights" and, in my opinion,
do not fall within the mandate of the Commission. If they do, in the
opinion of the Commission, form part of its mandate, I trust that it will
also examine the ANC's much more extensive disinformation and propaganda
campaigns against the former government.


Questions 3- 6

I am not in possession of any information that might be of use to you
with regard to these queries. I suggest that you consult the relevant
authorities in this regard and that you peruse the records of the recent
trial in which Operation Marion was so prominently featured.


Question 7

Please refer once again to pages 26 and 27 of my submission with regard
to the steps that I took to investigate allegations of human rights
abuses and to normalise the role of the security forces. Please refer to
my press statement of 30 July 1991 in which I dealt with the whole
question of covert operations and the steps that I had, by that time,
taken to investigate and normalise the situation. Please also refer to my
press statement of 19 December 1992 and to the National Party's statement
of 16 January 1997 with regard to the steps that I took in connection
with Lt-Gen Steyn's investigation.

From all of these statements and subsequent revelations it is clear that
the security forces were not sufficiently in control of some of their
elements. On pages 12 to 18 of my submission I tried to explain - without
condoning - the circumstances of unconventional warfare in which such
abuses could have occurred:

* The ANC and its allies accepted few rules in the manner in which they
  conducted their armed struggle.

* They had, by their own admission, declared war on the State with the
  aim of seizing power.

* They showed neither mercy nor quarter in the pursuit of their armed
  struggle - either against the security forces or against those in the
  black community who opposed them. Thus, in a an interview with Sechaba
  in December 1986 the late Chris Hani said:


"If we are to elaborate, briefly, our units have taken part in armed
operations in the bantustan areas. I think the most significant part of
this escalation was the attack in the very heartland of the Transkei
bantustan, Umtata, where an MK unit literally overran a police station,
killing more than ten puppet police."

In the May 1986 edition of Sechaba Ronnie Kasrils wrote:

"We have seen the stone being transformed into petrol bomb and hand
grenade; we have seen the people using knives to kill police and
soldiers; we have seen the people seizing the enemies' own weapons to use
against them."

This unfortunately contributed to a climate in which abuses occurred on
all sides. The situation was, no doubt exacerbated by the difficulty that
the authorities often experienced in securing convictions in open court.
Witnesses were seldom prepared to testify against those who had been
involved in revolutionary crimes. On pages 26 and 27 of my submission I
described the remedial steps that I took to counteract this climate.

Despite the abuses that occurred, it remains my conviction that the
overwhelming majority of the members of the security forces were loyal,
honourable and professional in the conduct of their duties. The SAP and
the SADF were essential for the maintenance of stability during the
transformation process and any action that seriously undermined their
role could have been catastrophic.


THE CCB

I had no knowledge of the existence of the CCB, or of the nature its
activities, until they were publicly exposed. No individuals or
components within the SADF, to my knowledge, ever approached any organ of
the government to gain authorisation for a CCB type structure after 1990.
Had such an initiative ever come to my attention I would certainly have
put a stop to it, since it would have been irreconcilable with everything
that I was trying to achieve in the negotiation sphere. After its
existence became known, immediate steps were taken to ensure that no more
damage could be done. The administrative closure of the CCB took quite
some time because of legal wranglings, which had to be dealt with by the
Advocate-General.

I do not possess the detailed information on the CCB that you require and
suggest that you approach the relevant authorities and consult the report
of the Goldstone Commission in this regard.


CROSS BORDER RAIDS

Question 1

The Government of the day was required to authorise cross border raids.
It believed that these were legitimate and necessary military actions
against organisations that were carrying out armed attacks against South
African civilians from safe havens across our borders.

The South African Government supported opposition groups within states
that provided refuge to our enemies as a means of exerting pressure on
the governments concerned to stop providing facilities to anti-Government
forces. The opposition groups often had substantial public support and
had frequently been suppressed by the undemocratic regimes involved.



Question 2

See page 11 above.




Question 3

As mentioned above, and as I pointed out in my submission, "as State
President I was involved in the legally required authorisation of cross
border actions aimed at legitimate military targets. Such authorisation
specifically excluded attacks on civilians and limited the use of
violence to the minimum required under the prevailing circumstances." In
such matters I would normally consult the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
the relevant security ministers and the Heads of the forces involved.
When I was President, questions of this nature were, wherever possible,
raised in the State Security Council or in the Cabinet.


Question 4

These raids were authorised by the Heads of Governments of the day. The
Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Security Ministers, for obvious
reasons, played important roles in advising on the implications of such
raids. Targets were selected according to their strategic significance
and the role that they played in providing bases for attacks against
South Africa and Namibia. The Cabinet relied on cross-checked assessments
of its intelligence organisations to ensure that target information was
accurate and up-to-date.

I do not possess the information that you require with regard to
casualties sustained in such attacks or the involvement of the SAP in
cross-border raids and suggest that you approach the relevant authorities
in this regard.


Question 5

I was not a member of the Cabinet at the time, but I am sure that the
deployment of South African forces in Angola in August 1975 was properly
authorised by the Cabinet and the Prime Minister. However, it was not
this action that precipitated the war in Angola, but the action of the
MPLA in reneging on the Alvor agreement and in calling in the support of
Cuban forces. South Africa's military action was supported at that time
by the United States and a significant number of independent African
states - as well as by leading Angolan political parties. The Government
believed that the action was necessary to help protect Southern Africa
from the encroachment of surrogate forces of the Soviet Union.





SUPPORT TO GUERRILLA MOVEMENTS IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES


Questions 1- 4

Considerable support was given to UNITA, in the first phase, in
interaction with the US in respect of the war in Angola. In the second
phase the support with regard to the peace process was also considerable.
In respect of RENAMO I was assured that no support was given to them
during my presidency. I suggest that you approach the relevant
authorities for the detail you require.

I am not aware of any initiative "to support any other movements or
organisations in other countries that sought to overthrow or influence
the policies of those countries." I can imagine that South Africa during
this period may have tried to use organisations to influence the policies
of other governments in the course of its legitimate international
diplomatic activities and its efforts to by-pass sanctions - but you
would have to approach the Department of Foreign Affairs for further
information in this regard.


CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WARFARE


Questions 1 -3

I cannot recall any decisions at Cabinet or SSC level to authorise a
Chemical Biological Warfare programme. It was only very shortly before
the 1994 election that I was fully briefed on the issue which by then was
history, except for the fact that the relevant scientific data was under
lock and key and that there was anxiety in many quarters about the risks
involved in what Wouter Basson might or might not do.

Because of the imminent election in 1994, I informed President Mandela as
soon as possible of the background. After the inauguration on 10 May 1994
the President and Deputy President Mbeki were fully briefed in my
presence. At least one follow-up briefing took place, at which Minister
Dullah Omar was also present.

Because of the sensitivity of the subject, as indicated by the Court's
limitation of the publication of certain related information in the
current trial of Wouter Basson, I would advise that the TRC approach the
Government for the information they seek in questions 1 and 3. I have not
been briefed on the issue recently.

As far as the last part of question 1 is concerned, I state categorically
that I am not aware of any authorisation to any structure to poison food
or water anywhere, or in respect of any person or organisation. The same
applies to question 2.


QUESTIONS ON THE DESTRUCTION OF DOCUMENTS


Question 1 - 6

I do not possess the information that you require and suggest that you
approach Mr Johan Mostert, the Head of the Security Secretariat, and the
relevant line function departments in this regard I can, however, recall
that there was nothing improper in the instruction issued by Mr Johan
Mostert to destroy surplus copies of classified documentation. The
purpose of the exercise was to ensure that surplus copies of sensitive
documents were not retained by those departments that were not primarily
responsible for them. As far as I know, and if the Cabinet's instructions
were implemented, the original documents were preserved and were dealt
with in the manner prescribed by law.


QUESTIONS ON RECOMMENDATIONS

My recommendations with regard to measures that should be taken to
prevent human rights abuses in the future, are set out on pages 29 and 30
of my submission.


QUESTIONS ON REPARATION AND REHABILITATION


Questions 1, 2 and 5

My views on reparation were briefly set out on page 29 of my submission.
Once sufficient information is available, the National Party would like
to hold talks with the Government to discuss possibilities for reparation
and rehabilitation, also within the framework of the RDP.


Question 3

My views on amnesty are set out on pages 28 and 29 of my submission. I
also spoke at some length on this question when I gave my oral testimony
before the Commission late last year. The National Party has recommended
to its supporters and to members and former members of the security
forces that all those who may have been involved in the perpetration of
gross violations of human rights should apply to the Commission for
amnesty.


Question 4

I do not possess the information that you require and suggest that you
approach the relevant line function departments.




===========================================================================

EMBARGO: IMMEDIATE

STATEMENT BY THE STATE PRESIDENT MR F W DE KLERK

On 18 November 1992, in pursuance of Mr Justice Goldstone's statement of
16 November, I gave certain instructions to Lt-Gen Pierre Steyn to
conduct a full investigation of all of the intelligence functions of the
SA Defence Force.

He has just brought his first preliminary findings and important
supporting information to my attention. This information, together with
the results and feed-back from various special investigations, indicate
that a limited number of members contract members and collaborators of
the SA Defence Force have been involved, and in some eases are still
involved, in illegal and/or unauthorised activities and malpractices.

Some of these special investigations were the result of previous
Government instructions as well as initiatives of the present and
previous Ministers of Defence.

The activities which have now come to my attention point to a process in
which political office-bearers, Defence Force commanders and the
Auditor-General were not fully informed or, very often, were misled.

I would like to emphasise that only a limited number of persons and a few
units are involved . Nevertheless, the information at my disposal
indicates a serious and unacceptable state of affairs.

This cannot, and will not, be tolerated.

The good name of the entire Defence Force, which has served South Africa
with so much distinction, is being threatened by the unacceptable
activities of a handful of individuals.

The SA Defence Force plays all valued an indispensable role in our
society. Together with the SA Police, the SADF guarantees the security of
all peace-loving South Africans. This role is an important assurance for
all South Africans with regard to the protection of their basic interests
in the period of constitutional transition which lies ahead.

As Commander-in-Chief of the SADF, I have a absolute duty and
responsibility to protect this essential role. I also owe it to the
overwhelming majority of loyal and dedicated members of the security
forces to uphold the proud tradition and well-earned reputation of our
security forces by cutting to the root of any malpractices.

Far-reaching steps have already been taken to prevent and eliminate just
such abuses. These include , among others, the disbandment of the CCB,
important changes to the security management system, the activities of
the Khan Committee, intensified political control and greater powers for
the Auditor-General.

As a result of the information which has now been conveyed to me the
steps are being taken with immediate effect to bring an end all illegal
or unauthorised activities and malpractices which have now come to light.
With this objective in mind, and as a first step with regard to
reorganisation, seven members of the SADF have been placed on compulsory
leave, pending the conclusion of further investigations. Furthermore, 16
members, including two generals and four brigadiers have been placed on
compulsory retirement, together with compulsory leave, with immediate
effect.

The names of the uniformed members involved will be made known as soon as
possible. In keeping with international practice the names of civilian
collaborators will not be published, but where applicable, particulars
concerning them will be made available to the Goldstone Commission, the
SA Police and the Attorneys General.

Further steps which now will follow, include the following:

* the active continuation of the investigation of Lt-Gen Steyn and those
who are assisting him.

* quick and firm disciplinary action, based on any further information
which might come to light.

* co-operation with the Goldstone Commission, where information may
become available relevant to its investigation.

* intensified administrative and financial control measures.

*court-related actions where prima facie evidence is available indicating
possible criminal prosecution. The SA Police and the Attorneys-General
will naturally be involved in this process.

Further facts will be revealed to the public in the course of court
proceedings, in reports of the Auditor-General and of the Commissions of
Investigation..

These actions confirm the Government's determination to act against
irregularities with a view to ensuring clean administration.

It is in everyone's interest that allegations and evidence concerning
malpractices in the security forces should be dealt with the greatest
responsibility. We dare not allow our security forces in general, and our
intelligence services in particular, to be crippled in their capacity to
work against the evil plans of those responsible for violence and unrest.
I stand by our security forces and our intelligence services and am
convinced that they will, in fact, be strengthened and encouraged by
effective action against the malpractices concerned which have cast a
shadow over everyone.

The Government demands that its political opponents should act with equal
decisiveness against crime and malpractices in their ranks. The role of
some of their supporters and often of prominent members in positions of
authority, in crime, violence, intimidation and disruption historically
and now can be doubted by no-one. Fine words and clever public relations

are just not good enough.

All South Africans long for peace. Any individual or organisation which
fans violence, promotes conflict and undermines the constitutional or
peace negotiations, is standing in the path of the overwhelming majority
of all South Africans.

We dare not allow that these elements, who are delaying a new
dispensation and who continue to promote conflict, to succeed with their
objectives.

For this reason the Government will not hesitate to act against such
people, regardless of who they might be, or wherever they may be found.

At the same time we will continue to ensure that the South African public
will be served by security forces who are irreproachably neutral and free
from political manipulation.

ISSUED BY THE STATE PRESIDENT'S OFFICE

CAPE TOWN

19 DECEMBER 1992



===========================================================================

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

STATEMENT BY MR FANUS SCHOEMAN, SPOKESPERSON OF

MR F W DE KLERK, LEADER OF THE NATIONAL PARTY


TRUTH COMMISSION ALLEGATIONS


Mr De Klerk has taken note of the statement issued this afternoon by Dr
Alex Boraine, Vice-Chairman of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

Mr De Klerk has thus far given the Commission his, and the National
Partys, support and co-operation. He is astounded and disappointed that
Dr Boraine should have though fit to launch a public attack on him
without first providing him or the National Party with an opportunity to
discuss the serious insinuations contained in the statement. This is
despite the fact that the Commission has evidently been in possession of
information regarding General Steyn's report for quite some time and has
also been in communication with Mr De Klerk during this period on other
matters.

The National Party must reluctantly conclude that this is a calculated
attempt by the Commission to harm Mr De Klerk. In so doing the Commission
has departed from its mandate of establishing an objective assessment of
the conflict of the past and has taken on an adversarial role.

In the statement Dr Boraine creates the impression that Lt-Gen Steyn
presented then President De Klerk with a written report on his
investigation into the activities of the Directorate of Covert Collection
(DCC).

This is a serious allegation, since Mr De Klerk has consistently denied
that he was ever presented with such a report. He has stated on a number
of occasions that General Steyn reported to him verbally. This point is
accepted by the Commission. However, Dr Boraine goes on to claim that a
staff report comprising notes and a diagram was made available to
President De Klerk.

This is seriously misleading. During the oral briefing President De Klerk
was handed certain papers and shown a diagram. However, he did not retain
these documents or even have the opportunity of studying them in any
depth. He also gained the impression that the document was Lt-General
Steyns personal copy and that he was not intended to take possession of
it. The document was in no way an official report to the State President.
It was made available to him only insofar as he had it in his hands at
some stage of the briefing. Mr De Klerk has never denied that General
Steyn had such documents with him during the briefing.

Dr Boraines insinuation is accordingly rejected in the strongest terms.

Nevertheless, the allegations made by General Steyn were so serious that
they required strong and immediate action. He immediately confronted the
Minister of Defence, Mr Gene Louw, the Chief of the South African Defence
Force, Gen Liebenberg, and other senior officers and insisted on drastic
action to cut to the root of the situation described by Gen Steyn.

He did so, before the outcome of full investigation of the allegations,

precisely because such investigations might have taken months to complete
and in his opinion immediate action was required.

Although Lt Genl's Steyn's recommendations were made that action should
be taken against officers at the highest level of the SADF, Mr De Klerk
was satisfied that there was insufficient evidence to take so drastic a
step at so delicate a stage in the transformation process. It was, in his
opinion, essential on the one hand to maintain the integrity of the SADF
and on the other to root out any possibility for the continuation of
abuses.

The steps that President De Klerk took were spelled out clearly and
openly the same day in a statement that he made on this matter. These
steps comprised some actions aimed at those who had been implicated in
investigations by Lt-Gen Steyn and Judge Richard Goldstone and others
which had become necessary for administrative and rationalisation
reasons. These actions included the placing of seven members of the SADF
on compulsory leave pending further investigations; the compulsory
retirement of16 other members of the SADF, including two

generals and four brigadiers; the active continuation of the
investigation of Lt-Gen Steyn and those who were assisting him; quick and
firm disciplinary action, based on any further information that might
have come to light; co-operation with the Goldstone Commission, regarding
any information that might be relevant to its investigation; intensified
administrative and control measures; court-related actions where prima
facie evidence was available indicating possible criminal prosecution.
The South African Police and the Attorneys-General were to be involved in
this process.

These actions were, indeed, drastic. However, when the Commission
provides further information on the allegations made by Lt-Gen Steyn in
his verbal report, there will be little question of the necessity of such
action - particularly in the climate that prevailed in South Africa at
that time.

Dr Boraines staement also creates the impression that President De Klerk
failed to provide Lt-Gen Steyn with sufficient support to ensure a
successful conclusion to hi investigation. This is also false.

President De Klerk received reports from Gen Steyn from time to time on
the progress that was being made with regard to the various
investigations that he had ordered. These included Lt-Gen Steyns own
investigation into the reorganisation of military intelligence
activities. On 5 April 1993 Lt-Gen Steyn reported to President De Klerk
that none of the investigations that he had ordered had brought forth
information to corroborate the initial allegations.

The fact that neither General Steyn, nor the Attorneys-General, nor the

Goldstone Commission, nor the South African Police could find further
evidence that would lead to prosecutions was highly unsatisfactory and
frustrating, not only for Lt-Gen Steyn but also for President De Klerk.

DATE: 16 JANUARY 1997

ENQUIRIES: JAN BOSMAN

TEL: 083 775 3517


