NP Submission TRC


SUBMISSION TO THE TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION BY MR F W DE KLERK,
LEADER OF THE NATIONAL PARTY

Introduction

This submission sets out the National Party's view of the historical
context within which the conflicts of the past should be considered. It
provides an analysis of the origin of the conflict; it deals with the
perceptions that motivated Government policies; it analyses the ensuing
conflict and the steps that the Government took, on the one hand to
defend society against revolution and on the other to promote a peaceful
solution to the complex problems that confronted us. It deals in some
detail with issues such as amnesty, reconciliation, responsibility, the
circumstances that necessitated unconventional strategies and the
measures that we took to try to prevent abuses. The submission also sets
out the National Party's views on the framework within which we believe
the Commission should carry out is mandate.

It is not, however, the purpose of this submission to provide details of
specific incidents that occurred during the conflict of the past. We
understand that detailed submissions will be made in this regard by the
former leadership of the South African Police and by the SANDF. Should
the Commission have any particular requirements or queries the National
Party will be happy to assist it in any way that we can.

I am acutely aware of the difficulty of establishing exactly what
happened during past conflicts. The many judicial commissions that the
former Government established during my Presidency experienced the same
difficulty. Nevertheless, the National Party will do everything that it
can to assist the Commission with its task.


Nature of the Commission's mandate

The 1993 Constitution identifies the need for "the people of South Africa
to transcend the divisions and strife of the past, which generated gross
violations of human rights, the transgression of humanitarian principles
in violent conflicts and a legacy of hatred, fear, guilt and revenge."

The National Party accepts the need for a mechanism that can establish
the truth about the conflict of the past and that can promote national
reconciliation. It was for this reason that, during my Presidency, I
appointed a number of commissions to investigate allegations relating to
the conflict. These included the Commission on Public Violence (the
Goldstone Commission) which I gave full scope and support to investigate
allegations relating to the perpetration of violence by any party during
the conflict. The National Party accordingly supported the establishment
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, notwithstanding its
reservations about some aspects of the relevant legislation and the
process that it established.

The 1993 constitution also requires that the conflicts of the past should
be dealt with "on the basis that there is a need for understanding but
not for vengeance, a need for reparation but not for retaliation, a need
for ubuntu but not for victimisation." It stipulates further that
"amnesty shall be granted in respect of acts, omissions and offences
associated with political objectives and committed in the course of the
conflicts of the past."

It is essential for the success of the Commission that it should at all
times bear in mind these points of departure and the overall objective of
promoting reconciliation. It must, in particular, ensure that its
deliberations are not exploited or manipulated for party-political gain.
It must be scrupulously impartial in dealing with transgressions by all
parties. It must also ensure that people who may be innocent of any
wrong-doing are not publicly humiliated or subjected to trial by the
media on the basis of untested allegations.

The Commission should also consider the elusive nature of "truth" in an
historical or political context. Perceptions of what is true vary from
time to time, from place to place and from party to party according to
the affiliations and convictions of those involved. The Commission should
bear this in mind when considering the motives and actions of those
involved in the conflict of the past. It should also try to free itself
of the preconceptions generated over the years by the vitriolic
propaganda that was disseminated by all sides during the period of
conflict.


Authorship of the submission

I am making this submission on behalf of the National Party, as its
leader and as former State President. It relates primarily to my own
presidency and to other occurrences of which I have personal knowledge. I
cannot speak with the same authority with regard to developments that
fall outside this framework. In this regard, I made an unsuccessful
attempt to enlist the co-operation of by predecessor, Mr P W Botha. The
submission was, however, prepared after discussions with the retired
leadership of the South African Defence Force, the South African Police
and former members of the Government during my Presidency. Although we
are in substantial agreement on its contents, we also agreed that the
SANDF and the retired leadership of the SAP should prepare separate
submissions reflecting their respective areas of knowledge of the events
of the past.

I must also stress that a distinction should be drawn between what have
become known as the "old National Party" and the "New National Party".
There is a profound difference between the National Party as it is
presently constituted and the party that ruled South Africa for the first
decades after its election victory in 1948. The policies and philosophy
of the National Party as it is today are diametrically different from
those of the old party. It also has a different support base. More than
half of the people who voted for the National Party in the last election
were black, coloured or Indian South Africans. Neither they, nor our
younger white supporters, can or should be associated in any way with the
apartheid policies of the past.

The recent history of the National Party can be divided into four
distinct periods:

* the first period of rigid apartheid, between 1948 and 1960, which was
  characterised by the adoption of comprehensive segregation and security
  legislation and by the campaign for the establishment of a republic;

* the second period of apartheid - or separate development - between
  1960 and 1978, during which the Government attempted to achieve a
  constitutional settlement through the establishment and development of
  black national states and also during which South Africa experienced
  growing international isolation;

* the period of reform between 1978 and 1990, during which most of the
  revolutionary conflict took place, much of the apartheid system was
  dismantled, the electoral base was broadened, and negotiations were
  initiated;

* the transformation period since 2 February 1990, during which the
  National Party took the decision to initiate inclusive constitutional
  negotiations; the political situation in South Africa was normalised;
  and the remaining apartheid legislation was repealed. During this
  period the National Party reconstituted itself, opened its membership
  to South Africans of all races and took its place as one of the New
  South Africa's fully multi-racial and democratic parties.

A distinction should also be made between the various National Party
administrations between 1948 and 1994. For example, my administration and
that of my predecessor belonged to the reform and transformation periods
of the National Party. In my opinion it is quite incorrect to refer to
our administrations as the "apartheid Government". We were primarily
concerned with the dismantling of apartheid, the defence of the country
against revolution and the search for workable democratic alternatives
that would accommodate the political aspirations of all South Africans.

I retain my deep respect for our former leaders. Within the context of
their time, circumstances and convictions they were good and honourable
men - although history has subsequently shown that, as far as the policy
of apartheid was concerned, they were deeply mistaken in the course upon
which they embarked. In particular, I should like to place on record the
role played by my predecessor, President P W Botha, in initiating the
process of change that ultimately led to the peaceful transformation of
our society.

My own father was a Cabinet Minister under three Prime Ministers and my
aunt was married to a Prime Minister of South Africa. I myself have
always been a loyal supporter of the National Party. I supported its
policies in the period before 1978, when I believed that they could bring
about a just constitutional solution for all South Africans.
Subsequently, during the reform period my colleagues and I worked for the
transformation of the party; we dismantled apartheid; we defended South
Africa against those who planned to seize power by violent and
unconstitutional means; and we played a leading role in the establishment
of the New South Africa. Now as supporters of the new National Party we
are enthusiastic participants in the non-racial democracy that we helped
to create.

I will endeavour, in this submission, to explain how this transformation
occurred.



Historical context

Three hundred and forty-four years ago Europeans first settled at the
Cape of Good Hope. They came for a variety of reasons: many as employees
of the Dutch East India Company; some as farmers and merchants; and many,
including my own ancestors, to escape from religious persecution.

During the next century they trekked further and further away from the
Cape, leaving scattered villages - such as Stellenbosch, Paarl,
Swellendam and Graaff Reinet in their wake. They were pastoral people who
felt uncomfortable if they could see the smoke from their neighbour's
farm. In such circumstances, it is not surprising that they soon
developed a sense of hardy independence and resentment for far-away and
ineffective authority - whether that authority was the Dutch East India
Company or the British, who first arrived in the Cape two hundred years
ago.

At some stage they began to refer to themselves as "Afrikaners". They no
longer saw themselves primarily as Europeans in an alien continent - but
as a people of Africa, as white Africans - a people with its own emerging
identity, its own increasingly distinct language and its own sense of
destiny. They wanted political freedom, just as they had formerly
struggled for religious freedom.

It was primarily these factors that led the Voortrekkers to leave the
settled valleys of the Cape in the 1830's and to establish their own
republics in the hinterland - in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State.
It was their determination to rule themselves that involved them in a
number of internal wars and subsequently led them, in two bitter war, to
resist the expansion of the British Empire. However, it should be
emphasised that in none of these wars were they the aggressors.

These people - my forebears - understood oppression. During their freedom
struggle their homes were burned, their country was devastated and more
than 20 000 of their women and children died in concentration camps.

They understood resistance. They withstood British attempts to anglicise
their people and to strip them of their culture. They spent the first
decades of this century in further developing and entrenching their own
language, Afrikaans, and their own cultural identity.

They also experienced poverty and deprivation. The drought and depression
of the 'thirties forced many Afrikaners to leave their farms and migrate
to the cities where they earned a place for themselves in the national
economy.

These are the traditions that we were taught as children. We were taught
to revere heroes such as Piet Retief and Dirkie Uys, such as Paul Kruger
and Christiaan de Wet. The collective memories that we inherited were of
the Covenant of Blood River; the oath that was taken at Paardekraal to
regain our independence from the British; our victory at Majuba and the
bitterness of our defeat in the Anglo-Boer War in 1902.

The history of the first half of this century, with which we grew up, was
dominated by the conflict and tension between "Boer and Brit". For us, in
the National Party, the key issue at that time was the campaign to
establish a republic. The quest for the restoration of our right to
self-determination in our own republic was, on the whole, pursued in a
peaceful and constitutional manner - with a few exceptions, such as the
1914 rebellion and the activities of the Ossewa Brandwag. However, the
National Party did not subscribe to these activities and since its
foundation in 1914 consistently rejected violence as a means to achieve
political and constitutional change.

The National Party's main opponents were the "Sappe", the followers of
Gen Smuts's United Party who favoured close relations with Britain. Most
South Africans of British descent supported the United Party. In general,
they also supported the segregation policies and political traditions
that had been inherited from the British colonial administrations. They
were also opposed to policies that would lead to Black domination, but
rejected the National Party's rigid implementation of apartheid. The
great majority of United Party members were in favour of remaining within
the Commonwealth and were opposed to the establishment of a republic.

It was issues such as these that were at the forefront of the political
debate between 1910 and 1960. It was only in the second half of this
century that the complex relationship between Black and White South
Africans, really began to dominate the constitutional debate.

We are all the children of our times and the product of the cultural and
political circumstances into which we were born and with which we grew up.

Deplorable as it now may seem, until the middle of the century hardly
anyone in the European-dominated world considered that the indigenous
peoples of the far-flung colonial empires were ready to rule themselves.
The attitude of most "Europeans" - as they were called - inside and
outside South Africa was, at best, paternalistic. In South Africa, by the
early 'fifties, the strict racial segregation that we had inherited from
the past, had been firmly institutionalised. The more daring liberals
advocated a qualified franchise for "educated natives". But nowhere did
anyone seriously entertain the idea that the majority should rule through
a process of universal franchise - nobody, of course, except for the
emerging black leadership in the ANC and the Congress Movement - who at
that time were dismissed as "communist agitators".

It should be remembered that this was also the situation in much of
colonial Africa at that time. In the southern states of the United States
the colour bar was still firmly in place. Few political weathermen at the
beginning of the '50s forecast the coming winds of change.

However, in the fifteen years between 1955 and 1970 most of the countries
of Africa were granted independence. The receding empires left the whites
of South Africa increasingly isolated and out of step with the rest of
humanity. Racial discrimination and/or paternalism - which had been the
general rule throughout the European empires - were now universally - and
quite correctly - condemned. During the Anglo-Boer War Afrikaner
nationalism had been widely admired throughout Europe and in the United
States. However, in the climate of non-racialism, anti-colonialism and
universalism that dominated global thinking in the wake of the Second
World War, the concept of nationalism in general was in disrepute. As far
as international opinion was concerned, the right to self-determination
in Africa was associated only with black Africans.

This was the situation that confronted young members of the National
Party at the beginning of the 'sixties. The issues that we debated deep
into the night centred on the question of how we could come to grips with
this changing world on the one hand, and yet retain our right to our own
national self-determination on the other? How would we avoid the chaos
that was sweeping much of the rest of Africa - that was depicted in
horrific photographs of refugees fleeing from the Congo or Angola - and
yet ensure justice and full political rights for Black South Africans?
How could we defend ourselves against expansionist international
communism and terrorism and yet make all South Africans free?

The solution that we then came up with was "separate development".

We thought that we could solve the complex problems that confronted us by
giving each of the ten distinguishable Black South African nations
self-government and independence within the core areas that they had
traditionally occupied. In this way we would create a commonwealth of
South African states - each independent, but all co-operating on a
confederal basis with one another within an economic common market.

The underlying principle of territorial partition to assure
self-determination for different peoples living in a common area was
widely accepted. It was inter alia the basis for the creation of the
nation states that emerged from the Austro-Hungarian Empire after the
First World War, and for modern Pakistan and India after the Second World
War.

Although we were primarily concerned with maintaining our own right to
self-determination, it would be a mistake to think that there was not a
strong element of idealism in this vision. A number of new cities were
built in the states that had been had identified. Ten Legislative
Assemblies came into being, each with its own government buildings and
bureaucracy. In some instances the infrastructure was quite impressive.

Several modern universities were founded - which were formerly dismissed
as "tribal colleges" - but which are now accepted as fully fledged
universities. By 1975 some 77 new towns had been established and 130 204
new houses had been built. Between 1952 and 1972 the number of hospital
beds in the homelands increased from some 5 000 to 34 689. Decentralised
industries were developed and hundreds of millions of rands were pumped
into the traditional areas in an attempt to stem the flood of people to
the supposedly "white" cities.

It was thought that in this manner it would be possible to accommodate
the political and constitutional aspirations of Black South Africans. By
the late 'seventies it was also accepted that territorial partition was
impossible in respect of Coloured and Indian South Africans. They were
politically sidelined in the years of rigid apartheid and, in the case of
the Coloureds, removed from the Common Voters Role. Their representation
in specially created councils with little authority or power, could not
continue.

The President's Council was established to look into this and other
constitutional questions. Their recommendations ultimately led to the
adoption of the tricameral constitution in 1983 in terms of which White,
Coloured and Indian South Africans were given the opportunity of electing
their own houses of Parliament and of administering their "own affairs",
while power was shared with regard to matters of common interest.

Even this concept was, however, too much for some members of the National
Party to accept. In February 1982 twenty-two members of the NP caucus,
under the leadership of Dr Andries Treurnicht, left the party and founded
the Conservative Party. Their departure was an indication of the degree
to which the National Party, even by that stage, had started to move away
from orthodox apartheid.

Despite considerable efforts to develop the homelands, the flood of black
emigration to the "white" cities continued unabated. According to the
theorists, the tide should have turned by 1978 - after which the
supposedly "white areas" would have had a substantial white majority.

Of course, this did not happen.

The homelands were too small, too poor and economically too unattractive,
to provide a decent livelihood for all their citizens. It was also
evident that the great majority of black South Africans totally rejected
the concept of separate development. Led by the ANC, and its internal
structures, they insisted on full citizenship in an undivided non-racial
democracy. This situation was further exacerbated when six of the ten
homelands - and most notably KwaZulu under the leadership of Dr Buthelezi
- flatly refused to accept independence from South Africa.

This rejection of independence was one of the main factors that led to
the hardly noticed announcement by President P W Botha in the "Rubicon"
speech of 15 August 1985 that

"Should any of the black National States therefore prefer not to accept
independence, such states or communities will remain part of the South
African nation, are South African citizens and should be accommodated
within the political institutions within the boundaries of South Africa"

This announcement, in effect, sounded the death knell for the concept of
separate development and set the Government on the road that ultimately
led to the transformation of our society.

This new direction was formally endorsed and given strong impetus at the
1986 congress of the National Party which accepted "one citizenship for
all South Africans" and the implication that " any discrimination on the
ground of colour, race and cultural affiliation or religion" would have
to be eliminated. However, the Party still believed that political rights
should be exercised on a group basis. One of the points of departure for
its 1987 programme of action was the continued protection of group
rights: "This must be done on the basis of the maximum degree of
self-determination for each group, and joint responsibility on matters of
common interest, in such a way that the domination of one group over
others be eliminated." During the national elections of 1987 the National
Party sought, and was granted, a mandate by the electorate to pursue and
implement such a constitutional programme.

Thus, by the middle 'eighties the Government had begun to take the first
steps in the search for constitutional settlement that would fully
include Black, Brown and Indian South Africans. The policy of separate
development had clearly failed. Instead of providing a just and workable
solution, it had led to hardship, suffering and humiliation - to
institutionalised discrimination on the basis of race and ethnicity.
Instead of promoting peaceful inter-group relations, it had precipitated
a cycle of wide-spread resistance and repression in which unacceptable
actions were committed by all sides. Instead of providing a solution, it
had led to injustice, growing international isolation and to the
escalation of the conflict that had been smouldering since the early
'sixties.


Nature of the conflict

The conflict that South Africa experienced between 1960 and 1994 had a
number of dimensions:

One dimension was the conflict between (mainly) Afrikaner nationalism and
African nationalism.

Many of those who took part in the struggle from the side of the
Government, especially most of the Afrikaners, believed, to start with,
that they were defending the right of their people to national
self-determination in their own state within a territorially partitioned
South Africa. They believed that their actions were in line, not only
with the traditions of their forefathers, but also with the universally
accepted principle that nations were entitled to defend their right to
self-determination in a country of their own. As the impracticality of
this vision for the Afrikaner nation became more and more evident during
the 'eighties its importance as a motivating factor diminished for most
Afrikaans members of the National Party until it was finally abandoned.
It nevertheless remains, to this day, the ideal of a significant
proportion of Afrikaners who support the Freedom Front, the Conservative
Party and various right-wing organisations. The demand by these political
groups for Afrikaner self-determination in a country of their own
provides the context for many of the incidents that occurred in the
conflict up until the inauguration of the Government of National Unity on
10 May 1994.

On the other hand, those who opposed the Government had a diametrically
different perception of the nature of the South African nation. In their
view neither the Afrikaners nor the Whites were separate nations, but
minorities within a broader South African nation. For them,
self-determination meant one-man, one-vote in an undivided South Africa.


Another dimension of the conflict was the struggle between various Black
political movements and groupings.

Those who were united in their rejection of apartheid at times
fundamentally disagreed on how it should be opposed. The two main schools
of thought were those who favoured violent and revolutionary strategies
and those who preferred to work for change within the system.

These disagreements led first to tension and then conflict between the
protagonists of these conflicting approaches.

Most notably it resulted in a protracted violent conflict between the ANC
and the IFP and in the murder to many Black political and community
leaders. Some of this continues to this day.

Another important dimension of the conflict was South Africa's
involvement in the global ideological struggle between the West and
expansionist Soviet Communism.

Those who fought on the side of the Government believed that they were
defending their country against what they perceived to be the aggressive
expansion of Soviet communism. They had ample reason to believe this. The
Sixth Congress of the Communist International had resolved, as early as
1928, that

"The CPSA ( Communist Party of South Africa ) should pay particular
attention to the ANC. Our aim should be to transform the ANC into a
fighting nationalist revolutionary organisation."

From the 'sixties onwards, the ANC received substantial aid from the
Soviet Union and its East European satellites. It was closely allied to -
some would say dominated by - the South African Communist Party. The SACP
was, in turn, one of the most Stalinist and pro-Soviet parties in the
world. Among other actions, it had enthusiastically supported the Soviet
invasions of Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan. The Soviet threat
was not simply McCarthyite paranoia on the part of the South African
Government. The reality was that SACP members held dominant positions
within the ANC's National Executive Committee and that Soviet surrogate
forces had established strong positions in a number of Southern African
countries, particularly in Angola. In September 1987 Soviet and Cuban-led
MPLA forces clashed with UNITA and SADF forces at the Lomba River in
southern Angola in what was probably the largest set-piece battle in the
continent since the Battle of El Alemein.

The SACP's agenda was to use its position in the ANC-led alliance to
promote a two-phase revolution. According to a policy document produced
by the SACP politburo in May 1986

"? the immediate attainment of the socialist revolution is not on the
agenda. This does not mean that we are putting it off but, to quote
Lenin's words, we 'are taking the first steps towards it in the only
possible way, along the only correct path, namely the path of a
democratic republic.'"

The perception of those on the side of the Government was accordingly
that the installation of an ANC Government would lead to Communist
domination. They believed that in conducting their struggle against the
ANC, they were playing an important role in the West's global resistance
to the expansion of Soviet Communism.

On the other hand, those who fought against the Government were often
equally convinced that they were fighting against a bastion of capitalism
and imperialism.


Finally, there was a dimension to the conflict that related to the
defence of the State and the maintenance of law and order.

Many of those who fought on the side of the security forces, particularly
national servicemen and reservists, often did so without any specific
ideological or party-political motive. They believed that it was their
duty to carry out the instructions of a legally constituted and
internationally recognised government. They also believed that they had
an underlying and non-party-political responsibility to uphold the law
and to protect the lives and property of citizens.

Millions of South Africans who opposed apartheid also condemned the use
of violence to achieve political objectives. Newspapers in South Africa
which were strenuous opponents of apartheid often supported cross-border
actions by the security forces in cases where perpetrators sought refuge
in neighbouring states after murdering civilians in South Africa.

The great majority of those who served in the security forces during the
conflict were honourable, professional and dedicated men and women. They
were convinced that their cause was just, necessary and legitimate.

The conflict escalated from 1960 onwards, after the ANC decided to opt
for an armed struggle. It is doubtful whether this decision hastened the
transformation process. It can be argued that socio-economic forces had
already begun to change South Africa and that non-violent pressure and
resistance would have been far more effective vehicles for change. Be
that as it may, the ANC's armed struggle inevitably contributed to a
major escalation in the general violence that has plagued South Africa
ever since.

In the perception of those on the Government side, the ANC and its allies
were committed to the revolutionary seizure of power and not to peaceful
and negotiated reform. For example, one of the documents submitted during
the Rivonia trial in 1964 read as follows:

"The people of South Africa, led by the South African Communist Party,
will destroy capitalist society and build in its place socialism? The
transition from capitalism to socialism and the liberation of the working
class from the yoke cannot be effected by slow changes or by reforms as
reactionaries and liberals often advise, but by revolution. One must
therefore be a revolutionary and not a reformist."

At its National Consultative Conference in June 1985 the ANC recommitted
itself to a Peoples War "in which a liberation army becomes rooted
amongst the people who progressively participate actively in the armed
struggle both politically and militarily?" Such a struggle would "lead
inevitably to a revolutionary situation in which our plan and aim must be
the seizure of power through a general insurrection."

Between September 1984 and May 1986 the ANC's revolutionary strategy had
the following results:

* 3 477 homes, owned or occupied by Black South Africans, were
  destroyed or badly damaged;

* 1 220 black schools were destroyed or badly damaged;

* black education and local authorities were seriously disrupted;

* 573 people were killed in black-on-black violence, including 295
  people who were burned to death by the necklace method.

The ANC's offensive against the Government was supported by an
international campaign of unprecedented proportions. This campaign was
centred in the United Nations and its agencies and was orchestrated by
the ANC, its Soviet allies and by international anti-apartheid movements.
At one stage, there were no fewer than 15 UN committees and organs that
were solely or primarily dedicated to the struggle against South Africa.
The international campaign affected every aspect of South Africa's
international relations and ultimately led to the imposition of arms,
oil, sport, cultural, economic and financial sanctions against South
Africa. The objectives of this campaign included an unprecedented
international propaganda offensive, the isolation of South Africa through
the imposition of comprehensive sanctions, support for the "armed
struggle" and the ultimate overthrow of the South African Government.

The then Government believed that it was being confronted by a "total
onslaught". Its response was to develop its own "total strategy". The
need for such a total strategy was identified in a Government White Paper
on Defence in 1977 in the following terms;

"The process of ensuring and maintaining the sovereignty of a state's
authority in a conflict situation has, through the evolution of warfare,
shifted from the purely military to an integrated national action?.. the
resolution of conflict in the times in which we now live demands
interdependent and co-ordinated action in all fields - military,
psychological, economic, political, sociological, technological,
diplomatic, ideological, cultural etc."

The vehicle that the Government established to implement its total
strategy and to co-ordinate the activities of all branches of the
Government in response to what it viewed as the "total onslaught" was the
National Management System. The National Management System comprised the
National Security Management System (NSMS) and the National Welfare
Management System (NWMS). Responsibility for the NSMS rested with the
State Security Council, which was established in June, 1972. The NSMS
also included:

* a Working Committee comprising the heads of "security" departments:

* a Secretariat,

* Interdepartmental Committees, aimed at the co-ordination of the
  planning and implementation of policies at the national level,

* Joint Management Centres (JMCs), sub-divided into Sub- and Mini-
  JMCs, which operated at the regional and local levels and which were
  responsible for the co-ordination of the actions of departments and
  other organisations in the implementation of policies approved at the
  national level.

The prime purpose of the NMS was to ensure that all branches of
government responded in a co-ordinated manner to the revolutionary
threat. It was accepted that this threat could not be effectively - or
even primarily - countered by military or security action. The main
accent should instead fall on the provision of effective government and
social services and in promoting inclusive constitutional solutions. This
inevitably led to the politicisation of the role of the security forces
and to their involvement in civilian administration.

It was the view of the Government that orderly constitutional
transformation could not take place in a climate of general violence and
insurrection. Thus, the National State of Emergency that the Government
declared on 12 June 1986 had as its declared aims:

* the restoration of law and order and security;

* a return to normality in the unrest-ravaged Black residential areas;
  and

* the creation of a climate in which constitutional change can take
  place."

The State of Emergency had, by 1988, succeeded to a reasonable extent in
achieving most of these objectives. It restored a more acceptable level
of law, order and security in most parts of the country; it helped to
re-establish some degree of normality in most Black residential areas and
it significantly contributed to the creation of a climate in which
genuine and workable negotiations could take place.

However, far reaching Security Legislation and the State of Emergency,
with the suspension of many normal legal protective measures, also
created circumstances and an atmosphere which were conducive to many of
the abuses and transgressions against human rights which form the basis
of the Commission's present investigations.

Unconventional actions and reactions

It was not only the strict Security Legislation and the State of
Emergency which created an atmosphere conducive to abuses and
transgressions. The unconventional nature of the revolutionary thread
created circumstances in which conventional responses proved to be lest
and lest effective. The revolutionary strategies adopted by the
Government's opponents blurred traditional distinctions between
combatants and non-combatants; between legitimate and illegitimate
targets; and between acceptable and unacceptable methods.

The normal processes of law - and even the government's tough security
measures - seemed incapable of dealing with this situation. Members of
the security forces watched, with increasing frustration, while
revolutionary movements organised, mobilised and intimidated or killed
their opponents, seemingly at will. The security forces were expected to
play by the rules while their opponents could, and did, use any methods
that they liked. There was a perceived need for unconventional
counter-strategies of the kind developed by the British and others in
successful campaigns against insurgency and terrorism. Consequently, the
then Government began to make use of unconventional strategies which, of
necessity, had to be planned and implemented on a "need to know" basis.

In dealing with the unconventional strategies from the side of the
Government I want to make it clear from the outset that, within my
knowledge and experience, they never included the authorisation of
assassination, murder, torture, rape, assault or the like. I have never
been part of any decision taken by Cabinet, the State Security Council or
any Committee authorising or instructing the commission of such gross
violations of human rights. Nor did I individually directly or indirectly
ever suggest, order or authorise any such action.

I have been involved as State President in the legally required
authorisation of cross border actions aimed at legitimate military
targets on the bases of cross-checked intelligence information. Such
authorisation specifically excluded attacks on civilians and limited the
use of violence to the minimum required under prevailing circumstances.

I feel in duty bound to also place on record that the above statement
with regard to my position, is also a reflection of the viewpoint of my
colleagues who sat with me in Cabinet, the State Security Council or
Cabinet Committees.

I suggest that the Commission examine the minutes of the Cabinet and the
State Security Council in this regard. Procedures are available to obtain
permission from the Government to do so and a full set of such minutes
have been lodged with the State Archives.

The type of unconventional actions which were approved, in principle, by
the Cabinet and State Security Council related to such issues as
information gathering, disinformation and assistance to outside
organisations opposed to the revolutionary forces. These

matters are not the subject matter of the Commission's terms of reference
and I will therefore refrain from dealing with them in detail. Suffice it
to say that none of these unconventional projects was intended to lead to
any gross violation of human rights. It can, however, be argued that they
did create an atmosphere conducive to abuses.

The Security Forces had to operate increasingly within a framework of
states of emergency, far-reaching security legislation, underground
activities and unconventional strategies. They had to give operational
interpretation to broadly framed decisions, aimed at firm and effective
action against the insurgency.

These circumstances created the environment within which abuses and gross
violations of human rights could take place. However, it would be a
serious mistake to adopt a simplistic approach in judging such abuses and
violations. Clear distinctions should be drawn between varying situations:

* In many cases it would be possible to conclude that the perpetrators
  of certain actions were bona fide in their interpretation of orders and
  strategies - that they believed they were acting correctly and with
  authority.

* In other cases it would be possible to make a finding that the bona
  fides of those involved was clouded by bad judgement, over-zealousness
  or negligence.

* And yet in other cases there is no doubt that there was mala fides
  which led to abuses, malpractice and serious violations of human rights.

During the latter years of the conflict, and more specifically during my
presidency, another factor came to the fore. The fundamental change of
direction that I initiated, which involved the opening of negotiations,
the termination of secret operations and the lifting of the State of
Emergency (which is dealt with in more detail below), were not supported
by some elements in the Security Forces. My colleagues and I were accused
along the grapevine of being "soft" and of being traitors. I suspect that
many of the unauthorised actions, that are now coming to light, were at
time directed as much against the transformation process as they were
directed against the revolutionary threat. It has now become clear that
certain elements misused state funds and were involved in unauthorised
operations leading to abuses and violation of human rights.

The nature and extent of many of these abuses have since been uncovered
by various commissions of enquiry - and particularly the Goldstone
Commission - by the media, by the courts and by many of the perpetrators
and now by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. It is not my purpose
here to try to find excuses for these abuses but to explain the historic
context within which they occurred.

It is important that the Truth and Reconciliation Commission should
continue to investigate all serious abuses perpetrated by all sides in
the conflict. Abuses committed by the Security Forces have been widely
publicised and are receiving extensive attention from the Commission,
from the Attorneys-General and from the Courts. Insufficient attention
has, however, been focused on the instigators and perpetrators of the
following incidents:

* 541 "necklacings" that occurred between 1 September 1984 and
  31 March 1993 in which 505 people were killed and 36 injured in the
  most brutal and inhumane manner imaginable;

* 57 landmine attacks that occurred between 26 November 1985 and 21
  February 1991 in which 25 people were killed and 76 injured;

* 487 limpet mine attacks in which 22 people were killed and 373
  injured;

* 10 car bomb attacks in which 40 people were killed and 548 injured;

* attacks on members of the South African Police, which resulted in the
  deaths of 1030 policemen between 1973 and 1993. Many of these deaths
  can be ascribed directly or indirectly to the actions of the ANC and
  its allies; and

* the attacks on the thousands of black South Africans - most of them
  equally opposed to apartheid - who were murdered, injured or
  intimidated because they chose to work for change within existing
  government institutions.

In addition, the Commission should investigate serious human rights
violations which occurred in ANC detention centres in Southern Africa.
These abuses have been the subject of a number of investigations
including those conducted by the Stuart Commission, the Skweyiya
Commission, the Motsuenyane Commission and the Douglas Commission.

The Commission must also ensure that, in its consideration of
applications for amnesty, it adheres strictly to the requirements of the
1993 constitution and to the precedent already established by the
extension of indemnity to large numbers of people in terms of the Further
Indemnity Act. In this regard, it should be borne in mind that the great
majority of such indemnities were granted to supporters of revolutionary
movements, that many of them had committed and had been convicted of
heinous and disproportional crimes and that their release was part of the
price demanded by the ANC in September 1992 for returning to the
negotiating table.

According to the South African Institute of Race Relations 18 997 people
died as a result of political violence between September 1984 and
December 1993. The scope of the human suffering involved in this
statistic is difficult to conceive. All South Africans must be truly
grateful that the parties involved in the conflict were able to resolve
their differences and antipathies through peaceful negotiations. By
so-doing they were able to draw the country back from the brink of a
general war that might well have cost the lives of hundreds of thousands
of South Africans.


The nature of the transformation

By the end of the1980's it had become evident that the only possible
solution to the constitutional impasse lay in negotiations between all
South Africa's major parties, aimed at the establishment of a
fully-inclusive non-racial democracy. This was a difficult and
far-reaching decision for those in power - and especially for Afrikaner
nationalists:
* It meant that they would have to give up the right to full
  self-determination in parts of the country that they also considered to
  be theirs, for which they, as a small people, had struggled for
  hundreds of years. No other nation in the world has ever voluntarily
  made such a decision. Nonetheless a majority of White South Africans
  did so.

* It meant that instead of putting their faith in their own
  institutions and in their own ability to defend themselves, they now
  had to put their trust in negotiated constitutional agreements. They
  did so in a continent that was not renowned for the success of its
  constitutional experiments.

* It meant that they would have to reach agreement with parties that
  they had little reason to trust. The SACP had, for example, made it
  clear that it viewed negotiations simply as the first strategic step in
  a two-phase revolution which would culminate in the establishment of a
  communist state.

The negotiations were often on the point of breaking down. It is hard to
imagine, at the start of the process, parties that were further apart
than the National Party, the IFP and the ANC. All of the parties involved
saw one another - not as they really were - but as the stereotypes
depicted by their own propaganda.

Nevertheless, in December 1993, basic agreement on the new Transitional
Constitution was reached, despite the numerous crises, boycotts and
walk-outs that we experienced during the process.

There is a tendency now for some parties to claim a monopoly of the
credit for the transformation process. There were, in fact, many
different forces at play. Among these were, of course, the revolutionary
movements themselves. It would be wrong to minimise in any way the major
contribution made by revolutionary movements such as the ANC, or the
individual sacrifices of many of its members in the pursuit of their goal
of national liberation. This in not my intention. There were, however,
other important factors and forces involved in the liberation process.
They include:

* The transformation of the National Party.

From as early as 1978 the National Party began with its own tentative
process of reform - starting with the important labour reforms that
emerged from the recommendations of the Wiehahn Commission. This
culminated in unrestrained freedom of labour organisation and association
and the abolition of all racial discrimination in labour relations.

With the establishment of the President's Council in 1978, the National
Party also began to move towards the broadening of democracy. By 1983 it
had, in terms of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, no 110 of
1983, extended the franchise to the Coloured and Indian communities.

By the end of 1986 it had repealed some 100 discriminatory laws,
including many laws such as the Pass Laws that had constituted
cornerstones of the policy of apartheid. These included:

* the repeal of the prohibition of mixed marriages and of sexual
  intercourse across the colour bar;

* the repeal of the prohibition against mixed political parties;

* the abolition of race restrictions in immigration law;

* the ending of all compulsory resettlements;

* the elimination of many statutory racial barriers in respect of
  publicly and privately controlled recreational facilities;

* the institution of uniform income tax laws for all population groups;

* the granting of full freedom of movement to all population groups;

* the recognition of the right to full ownership of immovable property
  in Black townships; and

* the conversion of 99-year leaseholds to full ownership.

By 1987 the National Party Government had established fully
representative black local authorities. In 1988 nation-wide elections
were held for black local authorities. 26% of registered voters
participated in the elections, despite intimidation and strong opposition
from the ANC and its allies. Many of the councillors who were elected
were subsequently tragically murdered or forced from office through
threats to their lives, families and homes.

After I became State President in 1989 I took the following steps to
further normalise the political situation in South Africa:

1. On 2 February 1990 I made announcements that opened the road to
   inclusive constitutional negotiations. These announcements included
   the unbanning of the ANC, the SACP and other organisations and the
   release of prisoners, including Mr Mandela.

1. During the following months and years the Government repealed all
   the remaining "apartheid era" laws, including the Group Areas Act, the
   Population Registration Act, the Reservation of Separate Amenities
   Act, the Development of Black Communities Act and the Land Acts.

1. The National Party subsequently played a leading and indispensable
   role in the negotiations and the transformation process that led to
   the establishment of the new South Africa. It was the only major party
   that did not at some time or other walk out of the talks.

1. I also took steps to normalise and regularise the activities of the
   security forces (further details of my actions in this regard are set
   out below).

* The role of opponents of apartheid who worked within the system.

There were many South Africans, inside and outside Parliament who
believed that apartheid could best be dismantled by peaceful and
constitutional means. They undoubtedly made a major contribution. In
particular, the refusal of six of the national states - and especially
KwaZulu - to accept independence was one of the key factors that
ultimately persuaded the National Party Government of the failure of its
overall policy.
* The collapse of global communism in 1989

The collapse of global communism in 1989 removed the major strategic
concern that had dominated the thinking of the previous successive
governments for decades and greatly facilitated negotiations with the ANC.
* The role of the international community.

Sanctions imposed against South Africa by the international community
were undoubtedly a factor in the process of change. However, more often
than not, they served to retard reform rather than stimulate it. The
Government was always more inclined to listen to the advice of countries
that maintained contact with it than those who sought to isolate South
Africa. For example, the decision of Malawi to send black diplomats to
Pretoria was far more effective in exposing the logical and logistical
absurdities of apartheid than any number of resolutions by the United
Nations. Throughout the negotiation process all sides received strong
encouragement from the international community to persevere in their
difficult attempts to reach peaceful accommodation.

* The role of socio-economic forces.

During the twenty-five years between 1970 and 1995 there were dramatic -
but largely unpublicised - shifts in socio-economic relationships in
South Africa which led to the de facto and ultimately to the de jure
transformation of South Africa:



* Influx control was abolished by the reality of millions of people
  migrating to the cities, long before the relevant legislation was
  repealed by Parliament.


* The Group Areas Act was abolished de facto by the reality that
  thousands of Black, Coloured and Indian South Africans had peacefully
  moved into supposedly white areas.

* The Separate Amenities legislation was doomed from the moment that
  young people with the same qualifications from all population groups
  began working side by side in banks, shops and factories.

There is nothing new in this. Much of history has been the story of how
changing economic relationships have led to changed social relationships.
Ultimately these changed relationships have placed irresistible pressure
on antiquated constitutional relationships and have led to the emergence
of democratic societies.

According to the propaganda of our opponents, the years of National Party
Government were characterised by the unbridled exploitation of black
South Africans by whites.

The fact is that between 1948 and 1994 there were major socio-economic
developments in South Africa, many of them originating from Government
initiatives from which Black South Africans, in particular, benefited
enormously:

* Despite widespread criticism of the education policies of the former
  government, the proportion of the total black



  population attending school rose from 8,05% in 1950 to 19,8% in 1975.

* By 1993/94 expenditure on education had risen to R27,26 billion. This
  accounted for 21,4% of the budget and 7,3% of GDP - one of the highest
  figures in the world. 74% of the school budget was allocated to
  Coloured, Indian and Black schools.

* Between 1989 and 1993 black university enrolment increased by 47%. By
  1993 Black, Coloured and Asian students represented an estimated 54% of
  all enrolments - compared with 54% for Whites. There were 41 342 Black
  Technicon students and 41 343 trainee teachers. Despite the disruption
  of black education and despite the low pass rates, more than 150 000
  Black scholars passed matric in 1992, compared with 64 000 Whites.

* During the period between 1970 and 1995 the black share of personal
  income increased from 19,8% to a projected 37,3%, while the white share
  fell during the same period from 71.1% to a projected 48,5%.

* By the early 'nineties there were an estimated 625 000 small
  businesses in the black informal sector of the economy. According to
  some reports, the sector had created about 3,5 million jobs, of which
  almost 500 000 had the potential of being transferred to the formal
  sector.

* During the last years of National Party Government rule genuine and
  serious efforts were made to remove racial differentials in all
  spheres. We equalised the salaries of all state officials. By 1993
  old-age pensioners of all races were receiving equal pensions.


* According to a study by the International Monetary Fund in January
  1992, White South Africans in 1987 paid an


  average of 32,03% of their incomes in tax, but received only 9% back in
  benefits.


In May 1994 the Government of National Unity inherited a country with an
excellent infrastructure and well-established financial, industrial,
agricultural, mining and service sectors.

Between 1948 and 1993 South Africa's Gross Domestic Product increased by
an average of 3,5% per annum in real terms. By 1994 South Africa was the
only country in Africa with a fully developed modern sector.

These facts are not stated to justify apartheid. However, it is a fallacy
to blame the policies of the past for everything which is wrong in
present day South Africa. Much more could have been achieved, had it not
been for apartheid; the revolutionary actions of the ANC and others; and
the resulting distortions imposed on our economy.



Concluding remarks

Against this background a number of pertinent issues need to be dealt
with, within the context of the views set out in this submission,
relating to the origins and nature of this conflict:



1. Responsibility

I believe that the Commission needs to develop guidelines in respect of
the attribution of responsibility to the various role-players in the
conflict.

Obviously there rests an overall responsibility on the leadership of the
various parties, organisations and institutions which were part of the
conflict. I accept such overall responsibility in respect of the period
of my leadership. However, when it comes to specific incidents,
occurrences, deeds and transgressions it will be necessary to apply
specific guidelines.

As far as the State is concerned, I submit that the following guidelines
would be realistic, fair and equitable:

Responsibility should be attributed

1. to Cabinet for all decisions which it took and the instructions
   that it issued, including all authorised actions and operations
   executed in terms of a reasonable interpretation of such instructions;

1. to the State Security Council on the same basis applicable to
   Cabinet, as set out above;

1. to individual ministers for all decisions taken by them personally
   in their ministerial capacity, including all authorised actions and
   operations executed in terms of a reasonable interpretation of
   instructions issued by them in the process;

1. to the commanding officers attached to the security forces on the
   same basis applicable to individual ministers, as set out above.




I furthermore submit that these guidelines could, mutatis mutandis, be
applied to other parties, organisations or institutions.

2. Preventative measures

The question may justifiably be asked whether the Government, during the
period that I was State President, exercised adequate control and took
appropriate action to prevent abuses - especially after public
allegations had persistently been made concerning so-called "third force"
activities. In response, I can provide the following list of some of the
steps that were taken in this regard and also in pursuance of the
normalisation of security force operations:

* Soon after my inauguration I gave instructions for the investigation
  of all secret and covert operations of the security forces with a view
  to their possible termination. By March 1990 a number of such
  operations had been phased out.

* On the 10th January 1990 I addressed some 800 senior police officers
  and told them that it was their duty to be absolutely impartial; that
  they should refrain from any political involvement; and that they
  should restrict themselves to combating crime and protecting the lives
  and property of all South Africans. On the 7th March 1990, I repeated
  the same exercise with senior officers of the South African Defence
  Force.

* In February 1990 I appointed the Harms Commission to investigate
  certain alleged murders.

* On 9 July 1990 the Government announced the final termination of the
  National Security Management System, and also drastically scaled down
  the role of the State Security Council.

* The management of covert operations was further reviewed after
  receipt of the report of the Harms Commission.

* I appointed a committee under chairmanship of Prof E Khan to advise
  on the desirability of all secret projects
  and to recommend on the phasing out, where possible, of such projects.
  Part of its brief was to advise me of the adequacy of existing control
  measures.

* I appointed a standing commission (The Goldstone Commission) to
  investigate incidents of public violence

* in November 1992 I appointed General Pierre Steyn to investigate
  allegations made to the Goldstone Commission with regard to activities
  of the Directorate of Covert Collection of Military Intelligence.

These steps - and particularly the reports of the Goldstone Commission -
were instrumental in uncovering many of the abuses that have now come
before the Courts and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. However,
the Goldstone Commission consistently found that abuses had been
committed by all sides in the conflict.

I therefore submit that extensive steps, in keeping with what could
reasonably be required under prevailing circumstances, were taken to
prevent abuses and the gross violation of human rights. The inability
since 1994 of the new Government to bring political violence in
KwaZulu-Natal to an end serves as a good case study of the limitations on
any Government to effectively deal with the type of violence which has
plagued our country for so long.

3. Reconciliation and the way forward

One of the main aims of the Commission's activities is to promote
reconciliation. This cannot be achieved unless there is also repentance
on all sides. It is in this spirit that I want to emphasize that it is
not my intention to excuse or gloss over the many unacceptable things
that occurred during the period of National Party rule. They happened and
caused immeasurable pain and suffering to many. This is starkly
illustrated by the evidence placed before the Commission at its hearings
across the country. Many of the accounts by witnesses are deeply moving.

I should like to express my deepest sympathy with all those on all sides
who suffered during the conflict.

I, and many other leading figures, have already publicly apologised for
the pain and suffering caused by former policies of the National Party.
This was accepted and publicly acknowledged by the Chairperson of the
Commission, Archbishop Tutu. I reiterate these apologies today.

It is my sincere wish that other parties and organisations, which have
not yet done so, will now do the same.

Without reconciliation, the future is bleak. I commit the National Party
to continue on the road of reconciliation, reconstruction and development.


1. Amnesty and reparation

I believe that reconciliation goes hand in hand with the issue of amnesty
and reparation.

Throughout the negotiations that resulted in the 1993 Constitution it was
the understanding amongst the parties that amnesty will be provided for
in legislation in line with agreements that had been reached during the
process of negotiations. Those agreements and understandings secured the
negotiated constitutional settlement that resulted in the peaceful
transformation that we have experienced over the last number of years.

It is therefore, fundamentally, important that the Commission now deal
with amnesty in an evenhanded way. Any effort to apply stricter norms
than those applied in the period up till now, will result in injustice.
During my term of Office I found it extremely difficult in many cases to
grant indemnity, because of my personal abhorrence of the crimes
involved. Nonetheless I had to pardon those then involved because it was
the only way to ensure agreement and reconciliation. This difficult task
now rests on the shoulders of the Commission.

The task of reparation is an equally difficult one and evenhandedness is
equally important. In this regard there are no direct precedents. The
victims of the conflicts of the past, more than anybody else, paid a
heavy price for the freedom we enjoy today. The country owes then a great
debt of gratitude and some or other form of reparation. The National
Party will support all reasonable guidelines developed by the Commission
in this regard and wish them well.


5. The way forward

Another prime purpose of the Truth and Reconciliation process is to learn
from the experiences of the past and to ensure that we never again repeat
the same mistakes.

I suggest that we should draw the following lessons and conclusions from
all of these traumatic experiences:
* No single side in the conflict of the past has a monopoly of virtue
  or should bear responsibility for all the abuses that occurred.

* Neither can any single side claim sole credit for the transformation
  of South Africa. The transformation belongs to us all.

* We should take note of the disastrous consequences of "social
  engineering", of trying to force complex realities to conform to narrow
  ideological views. We should learn that the means does not justify the
  end.

* We should limit the power of government through the kind of
  mechanisms that we have included in our new constitution - including
  the charter of fundamental rights; the concept of a rechtstaat; the
  separation of powers; and the maintenance of free and independent
  courts and institutions of civil society.

* We must, at all costs, avoid conflict in our diverse, complex and
  fragile society. We must accommodate diversity and provide security for
  all our people and all our communities. We must promote mutual
  tolerance and respect and work together to build a new, over-arching
  and all-embracing nation. In particular, we must commit ourselves to
  improving the conditions of millions of South Africans who still live
  in circumstances of unacceptable poverty and deprivation.

* Lasting solutions to complex problems can be found only through
  peaceful means, through compromise and through the accommodation of the
  reasonable interests and concerns of others.

* We must accept the importance of reconciliation, of coming to terms
  with ourselves, our neighbours, and our past - of forgiving and of
  being forgiven.

May God, Almighty, grant the Commission the wisdom and the insight to
succeed in achieving the worthy goals that Parliament has set for them.





F W DE KLERK
