	1


	1

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		4.12.96		MOUTSE

CASE NUMBER:	JB02515		NAME: BEAUTY NTULI

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Beauty I will come to Mr Wynand to make you take an oath
then thereafter Mrs Joyce Seroke will lead your evidence. Over to you
Wynand.

BEAUTY NTULI (sworn states)

MRS SEROKE: We welcome you, Mrs Ntuli. Will you please introduce the
person who is next to you.

MRS NTULI: This is Namaselele Josephine. Mr Ntuli had five wives. She is
one of the five women.

MRS SEROKE: We welcome you, Mrs Ntuli. We are going to request Mrs Ntuli
to tell us about her life with Mr Ntuli together with other wives as you
have mentioned that he had five wives. Tell us how many children do you
have. Tell us everything.

MRS NTULI: I have one child. Namaselele has two children. Mpande has one,
Makwena has one and Namasangu has six.

MRS SEROKE: How many of them in number?

MRS NTULI: There are 12 in all.

MRS SEROKE: What are they doing?

MRS NTULI: They are at school. We cannot just afford them ...

MRS SEROKE: Are they schooling?

MRS NTULI: Yes, but all of them are at school. Some of them left school,
the elderly ones.

MRS SEROKE: We ask that you tell us more about the things that happened
on the 12th July 1986.

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	2	NTULI

MRS NTULI: On the 29th July 1986, it was round about 8 p.m. they came, a
white person telling me that my husband had died. On that day my husband
did tell me that other people, white men, wanted to kill him. He heard
that they were all around looking for him. It happened that they killed
him. It was clear that they wanted to kill him. He went out for a meeting
but I can't remember well at what time. He went to that meeting. When
they went out of the meeting he never came back home.

MRS SEROKE: How did they kill Mr Ntuli?

MRS NTULI: They bombed him.

MRS SEROKE: What was he doing? What was he here in Kwandebele? Was he a
member of the parliament? What portfolio did he hold?

MRS NTULI: He was the Minister of the Interior.

MRS SEROKE: What other portfolio did he hold?

MRS NTULI: I know that only, I don't know of another.

MRS SEROKE: On the statements that you are having it was clear that Mr
Ntuli was a leading member for Mbokoto.

MRS NTULI: At all times he didn't tell us about his political activity.
The only thing I know is that every day he would wake up and go to work
and I know that he was working for the community.

MRS SEROKE: What kind of political party or political organisation?

MRS NTULI: I don't know. When he arrived with his papers from work then
he only told me that he is the Minister of the Interior and that is all.

MRS SEROKE: Just try to tell us about the situation, the political
situation in Kwandebele at that time. What was happening?

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	3	NTULI

MRS NTULI: At that time the situation was tense and people were burning
houses and they were burning shops. People were killed.

MRS SEROKE: What is the reason for that kind of political unrest that
property was burned, people were killed? What is the reason if you may
think.

MRS NTULI: People were killing each other.

MRS SEROKE: Who was killing who?

MRS NTULI: I would not know what was the reason for the killings.

MRS SEROKE: I want to know what was the reason. Those people who have
planted a bomb which killed Mr Ntuli, do you know them?

MRS NTULI: Yes, I know them. I firstly met them in Johannesburg. I don't
remember the date but I started to know them on the 31st October. They
did confess that they did kill Mr Ntuli. I didn't know them.

MRS SEROKE: When you say you saw them in Johannesburg where in
Johannesburg?

MRS NTULI: At the Truth Commission hearing.

MRS SEROKE: Was it amnesty?

MRS NTULI: Yes, it was amnesty.

MRS SEROKE: Did they confess why did they plant the bomb?

MRS NTULI: No they didn't explain that.

MRS SEROKE: You did say that Mr Ntuli did tell you that the secret police
are looking for him. Did he tell you what was the reason?

MRS NTULI: He didn't explain to me the reasons why, he only said that day
when he said the security police where he was talking with Judge Mahlangu
and they were talking about this thing very seriously.

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	4	NTULI

MRS SEROKE: It is surprising that Mr Ntuli was the minister of interior
affairs in the government at that time that they were in favour of
independence for Kwandebele. Do you know that? Did you know that the
cabinet of that time was in favour of independence for Kwandebele?

MRS NTULI: No, I don't know.

MRS SEROKE: If you don't know it will be very difficult to know that the
police were working with the cabinet at that time that this homeland
should gain independence. You don't know why they planted that bomb
because you said you don't know that the cabinet was in favour of
independence of Kwandebele. We will leave that point. We will ask those
who will follow you. However, you have said you have seen these people
who said they have bombed your place, how do you feel now after knowing
the people responsible for killing your husband because at the time you
did not know who was responsible for killing your husband. How do you
feel now?

MRS NTULI: My opinion is that those people should be brought to book.

MRS SEROKE: You know that they have applied for amnesty?

MRS NTULI: We don't know whether they would be granted amnesty or not. I
don't have forgiveness.

MRS SEROKE: We will hand over to Mr Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: If I remember well in Northern Sotho when it is like this
perhaps the five of you should be having someone who is to be responsible
for you, that is from the traditional point of view. Is there such a man
or such a head of the kraal who is directly responsible for your welfare
now? You have said that you do not know much about what was all regarding
the independence issue. I would

MOUTSE HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	5	NTULI

assume that you do not know because at that time in Kwandebele women were
denied franchise.

MRS NTULI: We didn't have a right as women to get into such issues.

CHAIRPERSON: We, the Truth Commission, we want to thank you for your
presence before us. We sympathise with you and we feel that the family
ties should continue and your role in the community should remain firm,
solid and spreading and for this reason the Truth and Reconciliation
undertakes to make whatever effort it can to follow up what has happened
to you. Already you have got at least a glimpse from what you got from
the Amnesty Committee but we are still mindful of what you have said with
regard to the children, the dependants that were left by (indistinct)
Ntuli. We wish that they be brought up within their family atmosphere,
within the community atmosphere and we will have all the committee
together with us we will see to it that whatever can be possible to make
your participation fairly meaningful will be done. For this we are very
grateful and we say please go strong. Understand the support we offer
you. Thank you.

	----------------------

