
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23-07-1996	NAME: EUNICE BONISWA OLIPHANT

CASE: QUEENSTOWN

DAY 2



EUNICE BONISWA OLIPHANT:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Sir, back to you.

REVD FINCA:	Welcome here Eunice Oliphant, we are going to hand you over
to Tiny Maya and she will lead you in your evidence.

MS MAYA:	Thank you. Thank you Mr Chairman. Ms Oliphant, I would like to
greet you. In the statement before us, we see that you will testify in
connection with the death of your husband, Mr Welile Alfred in 1992.

	In the statement there is something that says he was a member of an
organisation and he was accused of being a member of the ADM at that time
and it was said that the ADM had a part in his killing.

	Tell us a bit about your husband so that we can know why he was accused
of killing a member of the ADM.

EB OLIPHANT:	What is it that you want to know? Do you want to know who he
was, what he was? He was a member of the ANC.

MS MAYA:	Tell us everything about him. About his membership in the ANC,
what he did as a person and in the community as well.

EB OLIPHANT:	The main cause of the ADM being after him was that because
while we were staying there, the people in town did not want to be
controlled by Headmen, so they asked the Magistrate to please authorise
that they should not be under QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			EB OLIPHANT

Headmen.

	The Magistrate said that while he was going to forward the request to
Bisho, that somebody should represent these people in the interim, while
this request was being handled.

	My husband was appointed as the representative of the people on the part
of the ANC. There was then this conflict between the ANC and the ADM and
people did not agree, the Headmen did not agree because there was someone
from the ANC who was representing the ANC people.

MS MAYA:	Just to take you a bit back, please explain to us what the ADM
was all about. What kind of organisation was it, who did it consist of
and tell us more about the ADM.

EB OLIPHANT:	The ADM was an organisation of people under the leadership
of Brigadier Oupa Gqozo, the African Democratic Movement.

	After all this, after my husband was appointed on the ANC's part, there
were these Headmen who were part of the ADM. They never used to conduct
meetings and tell people that if you've got complains, bring it to us,
they used to, when they had a meeting, it became apparent that Sponda did
not like this, and he would go and report it to the police and they would
come and arrest him.

	He is the person that used to the complaints of the people and whenever
there was a meeting, he would be arrested.

	On a particular day the children when to Mr Xabendlini's house and burnt
it and there was just friction there. I wasn't present, I was at work.

	Thereafter the people of that house had to be admitted to the hospital.
The man of the house there was assaulted and when he got to the hospital,
he passed away, Mr Richard

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			EB OLIPHANT

Xabendlini.

	The children who were responsible were arrested because the people at
the hospital gave a statement to the effect that the children were
responsible for this deed.

	Fortunately I was going to be off the following day and I went home. The
day I got home, the morning of the following day, the children were going
to go to school, but the police had stopped outside in a Kombi and they
had come to arrest my husband.

MS MAYA:	Where were these policemen from?

EB OLIPHANT:	I am not sure whether they were the Tendergate policemen or
the Wittlesea policemen. There is a police station there by us in
Rocklands and there were also policemen from Wittlesea, so I cannot
differentiate which police these were.

	My question when they arrested him was, because when the statement was
being given at the hospital, I was present by the people who were
assaulted. My question was why they were arresting him and they said we
are not going in accordance with the statement, we are going according to
this list and they took out a list which they got at Xabendlini's.

MS MAYA:	This list according to your knowledge, what did it have?

EB OLIPHANT:	It contained names of people who was supposed to be arrested.

MS MAYA:	Why were they going to be arrested?

EB OLIPHANT:	They were the ones that killed and they said my husband was
the one that finished off Mr Xabendlini. They said the reason that Mr
Xabendlini is no longer with us, is you.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			EB OLIPHANT

	So they took him and took him away. After they had left, there were
other men there because there were no children, only men were arrested
and locked up and the Kombi came back to come and fetch all the youth in
the village and they were locked up.

	But in the afternoon of that day they were brought back and my husband
also came back that day. They were told to come back and they would be
informed as to when the trial would be conducted.

	I once again had to go back to work, so I don't know what happened after
that, but there were rumours that the ADM had said, sworn revenge and
when Mr Xabendlini was being buried, Mr Oliphant's body would be at the
mortuary and that is exactly what happened.

MS MAYA:	I would like us to come to the 27th of August 1992 now. What
happened on this day there?

EB OLIPHANT:	On this day of the 27th in 1992, I was not there, I was not
at home, I was at work. I had left on the 26th to go to work, because I
was going to be on duty on the 27th.

	According to what I heard from neighbours when they told me, they said
that they were afraid to come out because most of the people around me
were old people and widows and they said that there was a shooting
incident and when I got home, I saw that there were bullet holes in the
window.

INTERPRETER:	The interpretation service will continue once the witness
has regained her composure. Fortunately no one was sleeping in the room
into which they shot because since these rumours, we had heard these
rumours, we had to move our things, because they said that they were
going to burn our things, so I had asked a neighbour and taken all my

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			EB OLIPHANT

furniture in the house and kept it there. I did this on the day that I
was off and he kept it in his garage, so we just left a few things at
home and since, when they shot my husband was not in our bedroom, the one
they know us to sleep in.

	But he was sleeping in the children's bedroom which is towards the back.	

MS MAYA:	Was there someone that saw who was shooting by any chance?

EB OLIPHANT:	I cannot lie and say that there was, but the neighbours
heard the shots. My children were not at home, because ever since this
thing started, my husband did not want our children to sleep at home, he
wanted to be at home alone.

	And even when I was off, he wanted me to go and sleep at my parental
home, but I refused to I wanted to be there to see what was going to
happen.

MS MAYA:	What happened after the shooting?

EB OLIPHANT:	They shot and then he must have stayed there, but I think
the reason he came out must have been because they set fire to the place.

	They threw petrol there, because even the mat in the room was smelling
of petrol and the front portion burnt. The house was black to show that
there was a lot of smoke.

	I am sure that he ran towards the back door, because his corpse was
found at the back and that is where is was found.

	He was found outside at the back and that was in the morning, because
nobody had come during the night to come and look at what damage had been
done. He was found the morning.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			EB OLIPHANT

MS MAYA:	And what was seen as the cause of his death?

EB OLIPHANT:	A bullet wound. There was no sign of him having been
assaulted, because even when he was taken to the Doctor thereafter.	

MS MAYA:	Was anyone arrested after your husband's death?

EB OLIPHANT:	Yes, there were people that were arrested after my husband's
death, but they were never held in custody because the day that they were
arrested, there were members of the ADM who phoned Gqozo and Gqozo sent a
message that these people must be released immediately.

	And there was stories that there was a helicopter circling the area and
that these people must continue with their work.

MS MAYA:	So all in all, these people who were arrested, were released
without being charged at all?

EB OLIPHANT:	They were released but the ANC did not allow, want to allow
this, the ANC tried by all means that these people should be arrested and
prosecuted.

	And they were prosecuted and in all that time, when all this happened, I
was admitted to hospital for one week and when I was discharged, the
Superintendent had sent transport to fetch the children and we went to
stay at Sada at an aunt's place and while all this was happening, I was
no longer at Tendergate, I left them on the 26th and I never went back.

MS MAYA:	What happened after these people, the trial was conducted at
court - were they found guilty?

EB OLIPHANT:	One person pleaded guilty and that was Mr Lumko, he pleaded
guilty to shooting him and he was also a member of the ADM.

MS MAYA:	In your statement, there are two Mr Lumko's to

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			EB OLIPHANT

whom you refer.

EB OLIPHANT:	Yes, that is so. There is Mr Lumko the son of the man who
pleaded guilty to the shooting and there is this Mr Lumko who is a
soldier and he is the son of this man who said the day before this all
happened, I think it was a month or two before this happened, they came
to my house, what made me ask how this all happened was, because my
husband did not want to tell me everything.

	I saw cracks somewhere near the kitchen and I asked what had happened
and they said that soldiers had come during the course of the night and
knocked and they had seen that it was the soldiers' truck and apparently
they knocked and knocked and he said that he heard Bennie Lumko's voice
saying that they should kick in the door.

	They kicked in the door and he said that after they had kicked in the
door, he pretended as though he had just woken up and when they came in,
Bennie Lumko asked him why don't you open and he said, no, I was
sleeping, I went to bed with a headache and I then fell asleep.

	They wanted to know where the children were. My children were not
sleeping at home at that stage and my husband said my children are there,
and they said come, let's go to the children.

	They then took him to the children and all the time they were telling
him that you Mr Oliphant, and your family, we are going to shoot you one
by one.

	And they then went to my parental home, there was an old women. I live
with, my parents are no longer alive, my aunt lives there. When they got
there, the children were told to wake up.

	My children was still very small then. I do not know

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8			EB OLIPHANT

what his intentions were when he said that they should go to the children
and when he got there and saw how small they were, he decided to abandon
that and he took my husband again and they left.

MS MAYA:	How old were your children?

EB OLIPHANT:	Tanda was nine years old. He was the youngest one.
Thembinqozi was 15, Andile was 18 then.

MS MAYA:	Did you people know Bennie Lumko before?

EB OLIPHANT:	Yes, we knew him very well, so much so that before he was a
very good friend of my husband's, while he was still a school child
because we all used to go to church together and my husband was their
choir master.

MS MAYA:	Please proceed. Let us go back to the day of the 27th of August.

EB OLIPHANT:	On the 27th of August, after they had shot him, he was taken
to hospital and Dr Fernandez is the one who certified him dead and he
could see that the person who shot him, was not someone learning to
shoot, but it was a person that was good at shooting.

	He was taken by the police to the mortuary, to the State Mortuary here
in Queenstown.

MS MAYA:	I am just trying to find out, because according to your
statement you are complaining that Lumko senior was charged with your
husband's death, why is that?

EB OLIPHANT:	Because he was still old, he was old by then.

MS MAYA:	But he was found guilty?

EB OLIPHANT:	Yes, he was found guilty.

MS MAYA:	And until when did he stay in jail?

EB OLIPHANT:	He did not stay in jail for very long.

MS MAYA:	Why not?

EB OLIPHANT:	A message came from Gqozo when he was sent to

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9			EB OLIPHANT

Middeldrift that he must be released and they never went to Tendergate,
even now, they don't stay in Tendergate.

MS MAYA;	Do you know where they stay?

EB OLIPHANT:	No, I don't know.

MS MAYA:	There is somebody by the name of Mr Mrola that you speak about
in your statement, who is he?

EB OLIPHANT:	Mrola was one of the members of the ADM as well who was with
these people.

MS MAYA:	Was he going to be a witness or what happened?

EB OLIPHANT:	He was still very young then, but then it was found that he
knows quite a lot according to what I hear, that is and according to all
the knowledge that he had, and the information that he was giving to the
people about what happened that night, he knew quite a lot about what
happened that evening.

	It was found that the ANC had to try by all means to take him out of
Tendergate, because it was quite clear that he was going to be harassed
by people of the ADM.

	And apparently he was taken away and he was taken by Mr Smith, who is an
attorney is Cape Town and he went to stay by him.

	And when he was in Cape Town, he died there and nobody knows what
happened. He disappeared rather and nobody knows there he is.

MS MAYA:	And up till now nobody knows where he is?

EB OLIPHANT:	That is right.

MS MAYA:	I would like you to just go back a bit please so that we can
assure that there is nothing that we have forgotten to cover. How old are
your children now?

EB OLIPHANT:	My children are old now, I mean one has even been initiated.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	10			EB OLIPHANT

MS MAYA:	Are there any at school?

EB OLIPHANT:	Mbulele has stopped attending school. The two that are still
at school are Andile and Thembinqozi.

MS MAYA:	What standards are they?

EB OLIPHANT:	They are in standards 10 and 7 respectively.

MS MAYA:	Is there anything else that you would like to add before I ask
you what your wish is from the Truth Commission, what you would like the
Truth Commission to do for you?

EB OLIPHANT:	I would like to make sure, even though I cannot say it
myself because I know that my husband was really not shot by Mr Lumko, I
would like this to be investigated by Bennie Lumko, that the day he came
to my house and even when he mentioned that we should be shot one by one,
what he meant by that.

	And also that the Commission should try to establish that I know that it
is not Mr Lumko that shot my husband, I do not accept that.

MS MAYA:	Thank you very much, Ms Oliphant. I would like to hand you back
to the Chairperson in case he has any more questions.

REVD FINCA:	Are there any questions?

REVD XUNDU:	Ma'am, I would like to ask you is Mr Bennie Lumko still alive?

EB OLIPHANT:	Yes, he is still alive, he is still working, he is still a
soldier.

REVD XUNDU:	Where does he work?

EB OLIPHANT:	I don't know where he works now, but he is still a soldier.

REVD XUNDU:	We will try and investigate this matter and it will assist us
in investigating this matter. Thank you

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	11			EB OLIPHANT

very much.

REVD FINCA:	Boniswa Oliphant, we thank you for the story which has become
somewhat familiar to us people that were living in this area during the
time when we were under a very corrupt Government of the Ciskei.

	The way in which you have spoken speaks to our consciences. When the
Headmen system was imposed and the way in which this led to the killing
of many people in the then Ciskei homeland.

	When we leave from here we are going to have a hearing at Bisho where we
are going to be sitting especially for the things that happened during
the Bisho massacre, as well as other related issues, issues related to
the Bisho massacre.

	We hope that people who were in Government, soldiers, policemen who were
in positions during the time of Brigadier Oupa Gqozo will come forward
and give us a picture of things that happened then.

	You have already asked us to forward this question that you want to know
exactly, you want to know all the details surrounding Welile's death,
your husband's death.

	We sympathise with what you have told us, we thank you for it and we
thank you for the courage you have shown and also the time in which your
husband passed away, which must have been a very painful time for you.

	I trust that the Commission has gathered information while you were
talking and also about the children who had been left behind, the
Commission who will submit, make submissions to the President, I am sure
that they will pursue this issue and see if anything can be done for you
and your children in terms of what the President will say to this request
and we would like to thank you now and ask you

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	12			

to take up your seat once more. Thank you very much.

	--------------------

