
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:		08 APRIL 1997

NAME: 	MBULELO LAWRENCE "TOYO" PETER

CASE:		EC1061/96		-	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 2

____________________________________________________________

REV XUNDU: Mr Chairperson, I would like to swear him in. Please stand up.

MBULELO LAWRENCE "TOYO" PETER: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you. Mr Chairperson, he has been properly sworn in.

CHAIRPERSON: Over to you Mr Sandi.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Peter, you are here today to tell
us the story about yourself. Is that correct?

MR PETER: Yes, that is correct.

ADV SANDI: You are from Alexandria. Is that correct?

MR PETER: Yes, that is correct, I am from Alexandria.

ADV SANDI: You said that what happened to you in 1986.

MR PETER: In 1986 while I was at home, I was sleeping in my bed, but I
was not under the blankets, I was just reading a book, lying in the bed.
The police then came. They were together with the Municipality Police.
They knocked at the door. They did not knock in a proper way.

ADV SANDI: Was it at night or was it during the day?

MR PETER: It was before eight o' clock at night, they kicked the door. At
home when it was raining our door would not close properly. They just
pushed the door and it opened. My sister was there. They asked her for my
brother. She said that she did not know where my brother was. They then
asked where I was. She answered by saying that she did not know where I
was, because she just arrived at home. They wanted to search the house.
At that time while I was reading the book I fell asleep, but I could hear
that there were people talking. When I woke up it was the time when they
were coming in my room. The light was still on as I was reading the book.
They came to me and they asked where are others. I said who are you
talking about. They then looked under the bed and they opened the
wardrobe. ADV SANDI: According to your knowledge, were there reasons for
them, for searching for you, for looking for you?

MR PETER: No.

ADV SANDI: Were you taking part in activities which will make the police
to look for you?

MR PETER: No.

ADV SANDI: When there was toy-toy in your area, in Alexandria, what would
you do?

MR PETER: I would join the toy-toy.

ADV SANDI: Were you toy-toying like the rest of the people?

MR PETER: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Was there any youth organisation or a resident's organisation
in which you were a member?

MR PETER: There was a youth organisation, but at that time I was not a
member.

ADV SANDI: You said that they grabbed you by the chest. What happened?

MR PETER: They took me out of the room.

ADV SANDI: Did they beat you all this time?

MR PETER: Yes, the two police which were here today, they were present.

ADV SANDI: Did they beat you when they grabbed you?

MR PETER: They beat me when they were taking me out of the room. They
beat me in the dining-room and then they took me outside.

ADV SANDI: What did they use?

MR PETER: They beat me with a sjambok.

ADV SANDI: Why were they beating you?

MR PETER: They did not tell me why they were beating me, they just beat
me.

ADV SANDI: They took you to the police station?

MR PETER: Yes, they took me to the police station.

ADV SANDI: What happened in the police station? Can you please explain to
us?

MR PETER: As I was in the police station I was bleeding, because they
beat me in my one eye. They took me with their police van to the charge
office. When we arrived there they let me sit down, they gave me a cloth
so that I can stop the blood, they phoned the ambulance. They phoned the
ambulance, the doctor said that he will send me straight to hospital. He
said that he cannot do anything about the injury in my eye.

ADV SANDI: Where did he send you?

MR PETER: He sent me to Livingstone Hospital in Port Elizabeth.

ADV SANDI: Did you get treatment there?

MR PETER: Yes.

ADV SANDI: Who was your doctor in Port Elizabeth? Do you remember?

MR PETER: In Port Elizabeth, I do not remember.

ADV SANDI: But you stayed for how long?

MR PETER: I stayed for two weeks. I was discharged in the third week.

ADV SANDI: Did you go to any attorney for advice about what happened to
you?

MR PETER: The attorney visited me in the hospital, an indian attorney,
Naidoo.

ADV SANDI: Did he say that he was from Port Elizabeth?

MR PETER: He just took a statement from me.

ADV SANDI: Did you see him, did you see Mr Naidoo after that?

MR PETER: No, I did not see him after that, but he gave my case to
another attorney, Vanessa, in Port Elizabeth.

ADV SANDI: What did Vanessa do about this case?

MR PETER: I use to go to visit her in Port Elizabeth. She will tell me to
come back again and I would do that. It was very difficult for me to go
from Alexandria to Port Elizabeth, because I could not afford it
financially. She then told me that she was going to telephone, to phone
me.

ADV SANDI: When you were released from the hospital were you arrested?

MR PETER: When I was discharged I stayed for a few days and I was
arrested under the State of Emergency.

ADV SANDI: For how long were you detained?

MR PETER: They told us we were going to spend 180 days.

ADV SANDI: Do you still remember how many months did you stay?

MR PETER: If I am not mistaken, it is ten months.

ADV SANDI: In your statement you said you stayed for 11 months.

MR PETER: Yes, I think it is 11 months.

ADV SANDI: When you were detained under the State of Emergency what
happened to you?

MR PETER: Nothing happened to me.

ADV SANDI: Were you tortured or were you beaten by the sjamboks or were
you harassed?

MR PETER: No, I was not harassed, but my eye was very painful.

ADV SANDI: Were you beaten by a sjambok in your eye?

MR PETER: Yes, it was a sjambok.

ADV SANDI: Do you have a request to make concerning this case?

MR PETER: Yes, I do have a request, because I do not think I will be able
to go back to work. I am still young and I would like the Commission to
help me.

ADV SANDI: In which way?

MR PETER: At home I am staying with my mother, my father passed away. It
is very difficult, because we are an extended family. All of us are
depending and are supporting, being supported by my mother. I would like
the Commission to help me.

ADV SANDI: Do you get a disability grant?

MR PETER: Yes, I do get a disability grant, but it expired. I then
reapplied for it.

ADV SANDI: For how long was it, did you not receive it?

MR PETER: I do not remember clearly.

ADV SANDI: What reasons were given to you?

MR PETER: They told me that I could, I am able to go back to work.

ADV SANDI: Do you have any other request to make or is that all you
wanted to say before I hand over to the Chairperson?

MR PETER: Yes, that is all.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Peter, you said that you cannot
work, you cannot go back to work because of the injuries you sustained in
your eye.

MR PETER: Mr Chairperson, my eye is not functioning properly. Nobody will
hire me with such an eye. Even this other side is not functioning
properly.

ADV SANDI: Do I understand you well if I am saying that you need
treatment for your eye?

MR PETER: Please repeat.

ADV SANDI: Are you saying that one of your requests is that you want a
specialist to look at your eye?

MR PETER: Yes, I would like that very much.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mr Peter. I will hand over to the Chairperson.

REV XUNDU: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Peter, the story of the people in
this country, those who were fighting for liberation will not end with
names, such as your name, are being mentioned when this story is revealed
to other generations. The police will be implicated when this story is
being told to the other generation. The people such as the other
professionals, such as doctors, refused to treat people. You also
mentioned such a doctor who refused to treat you because of the apartheid
system. These names will come and they will be revealed to people. Sir,
together with other Comrades, we do remember your struggle, your
participation in the struggle. We thank you very much.

	------------------------------

