


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 25.03.1997		NAME: SIPHO JACKSON PHANGOMSO

DAY: 2				LUSIKISIKI

----------------------------------------------------------

SIPHO JACKSON PHANGOMSO: (sworn states)

MR SANDI: Mr Phangomso, I would like you to come nearer to the microphone
and as you are giving your evidence can you please face me so that if I
want to disrupt you, you can see me.

	Mr Phangomso you were in the same village with the two men here. You are
a member of the mentioned organisation?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes. The meetings were also held in my house, in my home.

MR SANDI: Are you a member of this organisation.

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes I am a member of this organisation.

MR SANDI: Your house was also burnt down?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes.

MR SANDI: Can you please tell us when this happened, what time was it,
who was in the house at that time?

MR PHANGOMSO: I would like to stand up as I am giving my evidence. Please
forgive me.

	Before my house was burnt it was at night, I was sleeping. One
policeman, names Mavatha came to my home together with Zincedile Pothe
and Viani Mothandabuso. Monwabisi Jama was also there.

	When I opened the door Monwabisi has a gun and he said ...

MR SANDI: Is Monwabisi a policeman?

MR PHANGOMSO: No, Monwabisi is not a policeman. He was

with the police.

MR SANDI: He had a gun?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes. The policeman also had a gun, a revolver. The other
two had sjamboks. One of them was a policeman, Mavatha. The second,
Monwabisi Jama, is not a policeman.

MR SANDI: These people who were not policemen, who were together with the
police, were they members of your organisation or were they members of
any other organisation?

MR PHANGOMSO: They were people who were asked by Mavatha to accompany him
to come and arrest us together with Nqetho.

MR SANDI: Were they coming to arrest you?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes.

MR SANDI: Please continue Sir.

MR PHANGOMSO: I woke up in my bed and I put on my clothes. They told me
to hurry up and I put on my clothes.

MR SANDI: Who was telling you to hurry up?

MR PHANGOMSO: It was Monwabisi Zincedile Pothe.

MR SANDI: They were telling you to hurry up?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes. Zincedile Pothe was in our village.

MR SANDI: What was his position in the village? What was his status in
the village?

MR PHANGOMSO: I was so scared because these people had a revolver. They
told us we were going to the Chief's house and I thought that they would
not take us to the Chief's house. They would take us to their homes. And
they did that.

	When we arrived at their homes they sent a message

for one man to be picked up.

	I was scared, because we were going to cross a river and it was dark. I
was scared that they were going to shoot us.

	These men woke and we went with them to the Chief's house. We arrived in
the morning together with Nqethu.

There were two of us and these people were six. We were eight together.

	When we arrived at the Chief's house we sat near the kraal and the Chief
just took his chair and he came with his chair to us. His chair was in
the back.

MR SANDI: Who is this Chief, because I saw you pointing down.

MR PHANGOMSO: There he is.

	They were taking us to him.

MR SANDI: Who is he?

MR PHANGOMSO: He is Chief Bukrula.

MR SANDI: Please continue with your story. What happened?

MR PHANGOMSO: When he said down, Mavatha said to him... MR SANDI: Mavatha
is a policeman?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes, the policeman. He said, Chief we have brought these
people. We want to know who is the real chief in the village? Nqethu
stood up and he answered them.

	He asked them, how is he a chief because he is a member of this
organisation. Mavatha said, you are a Chief, can't you see that you are a
Chief?

	And the Chief stood up and said, I am no longer a Chief. He said, can't
you see that he is the Chief.

MR SANDI: What happened after that?

MR PHANGOMSO: While we were still there Mavatha stood up again and he
said, Sir, you must not divulge what I am doing, but I am fixing
something up.

MR SANDI: Let us now go back to the incident, Mr Phangomso, to the
incident of your house being burnt, but before we do that, what happened
to you in the Chief's house? Were you released, did you go back home?

MR PHANGOMSO: When Mavatha left together with his group he left the word
that he was going to fix up something and we were scared after he said
these words. I saw him when my house was burning down, he jumped over my
fence.

MR SANDI: Did any policeman come to your house to look at the damage?

MR PHANGOMSO: I went to the police. I went to our Chief before going to
the police. I sent Zingisile, but the Chief did not come. Then I decided
to go to the police.

MR SANDI: Your intentions when you were sending this young man to the
Chief, what were you expecting?

MR PHANGOMSO: I expected him to come and to take me with him to the
police.

MR SANDI: Was that the usual way in your village when such incident
happened, before you can go to the police you have to go to the Chief to
report?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes, if something happened in our village you have to go
and report it to the Chief and you will be given instructions by the
Chief on what to do.

MR SANDI: In conclusion Mr Phangomso, what was the damage at home when
your house was burnt down?

MR PHANGOMSO: When I count my belongings that were damaged because that
was like a storage hut to me. Everything was there. I stored everything
in that hut.

MR SANDI: What is your request to the Commission concerning what happened
to you?

MR PHANGOMSO: Although I make this request to the Government I do
understand that I am old now, this happened while I was still working. I
do not know who is going to replace all the things that were burnt down,
because I do not have a son.

MR SANDI: What is your request to the Government, Mr Phangomso?

MR PHANGOMSO: My request to the Government is that the Government will
see what to do and will help me to try and built up my home again.

MR SANDI: Are you safe in your village? Is there a request you want to
make concerning your safety in your village?

MR PHANGOMSO: That will not help because as I am here today, when I go
out I do not know what will happen to me at night. There is devil all
over in that village. There is evil in that village.

MR SANDI: Is there anything you think will happen to you, Mr Phangomso as
you came here to testify to this Commission?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes, anything can happen to me. I will not hide that. If
the Government answers my request I will be dead by then. There is a lot
of evil there, a lot of darkness.

MR SANDI: Are you saying that you might be killed for having come here?

MR PHANGOMSO: I swear by my mother's grave. I am waiting for anything. I
will be killed, because I came here and spoke. They are going to kill me.

MR SANDI: Are there any other residents in your village that you think
should have been here perhaps to talk, to speak as you have but they are
scared.

MR PHANGOMSO: There is plenty of people. The entire organisation is
afraid to come forward.

MR SANDI: What are they afraid of?

MR PHANGOMSO: The organisation was destroyed when it started. People were
strong enough to come together again and was destroyed yet again. There
now is no unity within the organisation.

MR SANDI: Mr Phangomso, because we have a statement before us I am not
going to continue with other questions. I will hand over to the
Chairperson so that if he had other questions, maybe the panel, my
colleagues here may ask them. You may sit down.

	Thank you Mr Phangomso.

MR PHANGOMSO: I have a request. I request that Ngilu must come and talk
because he was our leader in the village. He is the person who was the
head of our organisation.

MR SANDI: Who is Ngilu, Mr Phangomso?

MR PHANGOMSO: He is Nqito.

MR SANDI: Thank you. I will look carefully at your requests and consider
them.

MR PHANGOMSO: Thank your Mr Chairperson.

REV XUNDU: First I want to know, perhaps you can clarify some matters for
us, because the elderly gentleman next to you is hard of hearing. In any
village, how many organisations are there, besides the Congo one?

MR PHANGOMSO: There are two organisations.

REV XUNDU: Will you tell us which they are.

MR PHANGOMSO: ANC and Sanco. Both of them were destroyed.

REV XUNDU: Were these organisations working together?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes.

REV XUNDU: There was no third organisation?

MR PHANGOMSO: No.

REV XUNDU: I would like you to clarify one more thing for me. In Elliot
Skhosana's testimony he talked about Khithiwe Pathekile who got an order
that there should not be meeting at his house. What was her status. Was
she a member of another organisation?

MR PHANGOMSO: I cannot answer that because it had already been said when
I arrived.

REV XUNDU: Maybe you can ask the gentleman next to you.

Why did Khithiwe Pathekile say that if you do not close down the
gatherings at your place then there would be trouble?

MR PHANGOMSO: They were against the meetings.

REV XUNDU: What about Mavatha? Was he a policeman in your village? Was he
from the village?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes he was from the village. Therefore he was a policeman
who stayed in the village. He stayed in the village but worked in
Lusikisiki.

REV XUNDU: Therefore when he addressed you, he addressed you in his
capacity as a policeman?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes, but he was member of - excuse me Sir, he said he was a
Station Commander... He said he was sent by the village. He said he was
representing the village.

REV XUNDU: Do you have another witness besides the Station Commander?

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes I have a witness. Yes, Monabe she is a witness.

REV XUNDU: Therefore our investigators can investigate this whole matter.

MR PHANGOMSO: Yes they may do so and they will get the truth.

REV XUNDU: You say that you saw Mavathu jumping over the fence. Did you
give that report to the police?

MR PHANGOMSO: The police were there when I gave that report. They did not
do anything about it. The police said they would patrol the area.

REV XUNDU: Which policeman were you reporting to? Which policeman did you
give a statement to? Do you remember the policeman?

MR PHANGOMSO: No, but the Station Commander was Zozi.

REV XUNDU: When you see the face of the policeman, would you recognise
him?

MR PHANGOMSO: I do not think so.

REV XUNDU: Thank you.

	Mr Phangomso, your request that Mr Pothe come up, this is not a court of
law. We are the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. If this was a court
of law we would ask you to call a witness. Secondly before somebody comes
here and talk before the Commission there must be a statement first. We
do not have the man's statement.

	According to our procedure we should first get a statement. If we let
him speak without a statement there would be no order. We cannot help you
with that. We ask for your forgiveness.

	Mr Skhosana, can you hear me. I would like to know what your requests
are to the Commission? Why have you

come before the Commission?

MR SKHOSANA: I have a request. If the Commission could compensate me, as
my life has been so badly damaged because of so much loss, my house. I
have nothing. If the Government could compensate and help me in whatever
way they can.

REV XUNDU: Therefore you are requesting that the Commission compensate
you for the loss of your house?

Is that all?

MR SKHOSANA: Yes that is all. I have a second one. And it is that if the
Government has a way we are terribly oppressed and live in fear. We
cannot freely join organisations that we would like to join. In our
village there is no peace. If the Government could intervene in our
village, please.

REV XUNDU: Thank you Mr Skhosana. I just want to know... Before you can
be helped by the Government we have to advise them. What do you think the
Government can do? How can the Government intervene, such that there is
peace in your village? What is it that the Government can do?

MR SKHOSANA: If the Government could liaise with the Chief so that people
live in peace and not in fear, even tonight we might not be able to sleep
at home because it might not be safe. Thank you Sir.

REV XUNDU: I would like to thank you as we finish off later on. According
to the National Unity and Reconciliation Act we have been given a
responsibility that if somebody has made an accusation that person should
have an opportunity to come before the Commission to respond to such
accusations.

	-------------------



















