

Questions put to the NP



Questions on motives, context and perspective

1. The Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act, No. 34, 1995
requires that we give expression in our Final Report to "the motives and
perspectives" of persons involved. Our request is that you kindly make
available to us a two to three-page statement on your views, motivations
and perspectives on the nature of the South African conflict. We would
like you to give expression again to the underlying ideology of your
party. What were the values that inspired the leaders of your
organisation over the years? What motivated the involvement of your
followers? What inspired the sacrifices which many of your followers
made? What drove those who (in the words of the Act) were "responsible
for the commission of violations"? It is important for these views to be
boldly, and yet sensitively, articulated in order to facilitate the
reconciliation process.

2. The submission states that "we defended South Africa against those who
planned to seize power by violent and unconstitutional means". How does
one achieve power constitutionally if one is disenfranchised and denied
many of one's most basic constitutional rights? Later you refer to the
government as "legally constituted and internationally recognised".
Apartheid has been condemned as a crime against humanity, by the United
Nations General Assembly and by the Security Council as well as in
international instruments. This has been generally accepted as customary
international law. Furthermore the government was internationally
isolated on the diplomatic, economic, cultural, sporting and academic
fronts. Is it not important to concede that it was Apartheid that was in
fact unconstitutional, illegal by international standards and
internationally condemned? Do you in retrospect agree that apartheid is
morally indefensible? Can one legitimately equate the struggle against
apartheid with the struggle to defend it?

3. In the National Party's submission mention is made of the four periods
of apartheid. Much attention is given to the context and motives of the
third and fourth periods. Can more light be shed on the way in which the
National Party leadership understood its context, and motivated its
actions, during the first and second periods (1948-1960 and 1960-1978)?

4. The submission does not mention the role played by cultural
organisations, academics and the Afrikaans churches, as well as by the
Afrikaner Broederbond in shaping its policies. Comment is invited on the
extent to which the National Party was influenced by the above mentioned
groups, not only for the initial formation of apartheid, but also for its
eventual reform initiatives and the shift to negotiations and political
settlement.

Questions of a general kind and those arising from the National Party
submission

1. In the submission of the NP it is stated: "We never hesitated to
submit reasonably substantiated allegations [concerning serious
violations of human rights] to vigorous investigation."

Is this true of all periods during which the NP was in office? How many
members of the security forces were prosecuted and/or found guilty of
having committed serious violations of human rights of a political nature
from 1960 to 1994? Do you think that this number is a reasonable
reflection of the actual number of perpetrators? Many of the policemen
responsible for investigating human rights abuse by the security forces,
who have appeared before the TRC have claimed that they were discouraged
from doing so and victimised if they persisted. Would it be fair to say
that under these circumstances it would have been difficult for the
security forces to undertake proper investigations into human rights
abuse committed by the security forces? The government devoted an
enormous amount of resources, in the form of, inter alia, the National
Security Management System, to investigating the activities of those who
opposed the system by both violent and peaceful means. Anti-Apartheid
perpetrators were pursued with vigour and tenacity. Did the government
make an equal commitment to investigating human rights abuse by the
security forces?

2. What steps were involved in "cross-checked" intelligence information
gathering (p.16)? How does one account for certain obvious errors in this
regard (eg. the Umtata, and Lesotho raids - as well as the raid into
Botswana by Vlakplaas operatives as reported in the De Kock Trial)? Who
is to take responsibility for such operations in terms of levels of
responsibility as outlined on page 26?

3. How can one ascertain who is guilty of what kind of offence as
outlined on page 17? It suggests that security personnel can act
unlawfully but in a bona fide manner. Is ultimate responsibility
therefore not that of those who gave the orders and formulated the
strategies?

4. The NP submission provides a list of identifiable incidents (p. 18) to
be investigated by the TRC. Can the NP provide more specific evidence to
assist the TRC in its investigations?

5. How does one explain the alleged ignorance of the former State
President and his predecessors of gross human rights violations committed
by the security forces and others? Why were the accusations of the
state's critics, the media and former agents of the state not adequately
investigated?

6. The submission creates a dichotomy between political and operational
responsibility. Is this division valid? Evidence has emerged that Adriaan
Vlok, the Minister of Law and Order, was kept fully informed about
operational activities. These included, inter alia, Vlakplaas operations
and the bombing of Khotso House. Comment is invited on who should take
responsibility for illegal operations undertaken by the security forces.

7. Reference is made to the struggle between various black political
groupings as a dimension of the conflicts of the past. The TRC has now
received exhaustive information that there was a deliberate strategy on
behalf of the former government and the security forces to generate
"black-on-black" violence. Was there ever such a strategy? Was it ever
discussed in Cabinet or in the SSC, or any of its sub-committees or at
any other level of the security forces?

8. The submission indicates that no one in a position of authority can
"know everything which takes place in the realm of his or her managerial
responsibilities". This raises the question of accountability. Who should
ultimately be held responsible for gross human rights violations?

9. Reports of political detainees give account of extensive torture and
suffering in prisons and places of detention. Damages claims against the
Minister of Justice suggest the same. This together with deaths in
detention suggest that a prison system emerged which promoted abuse. The
erosion of habeus corpus, the suspension of visiting rights and regular
torture suggests that politicians must not only have known about these
abuses, but did nothing to prevent them. Is this a fair assumption?

10. The NP submission concedes that "far reaching security legislation
and the State of Emergency created circumstances and an atmosphere
conducive to human rights abuse". Is the NP aware that sources indicate
that over 80% of people detained without trial complained of some form of
torture? It is argued that neither the former State President nor members
of the Cabinet individually, directly or indirectly, ordered or
authorised any gross violation of human rights. Why then did the NP
government propose a State of Emergency? Comment is invited.

11. Recent documentation was brought to light which indicated Cabinet
approval in 1976 of a recommendation by Minister Jimmy Kruger that
increased force should be used to break the political unrest in Soweto
during June/July 1976 with the foreseeable outcome of increased deaths.
Did Cabinet approve this recommendation? How was this decision
implemented? What instructions were issued to the security forces as a
result? Can this not be interpreted as giving too much discretion to
"foot soldiers"? Who should take responsibility for these deaths?

12. Were similar decisions made regarding unrest control during the 1980s?

13. The former State President claims that none of his cabinet colleagues
were involved directly or indirectly in human rights abuse. Is this
assertion maintained in the light of the allegation made against then
Minister Vlok by General van der Merwe?

14. The notion of "moral responsibility", as used in relation to the
State, implies that leaders of the State need to take responsibility for
acts committed by their agents who acted in compliance with their orders
or general policy. It further means that where agents acted without
specific orders - while their behaviour remained unpunished by the State
- it is the officers the State who are obliged to accept moral
culpability.

Does the National Party accept responsibility for the gross human rights
violations committed by its agents in the name of upholding the regime?
As the government of the day, does the National Party accept that
irrespective of whether individual leaders directly participated or
collaborated in gross human rights violations or not, that the government
is morally obliged to accept responsibility for what happened? Does the
government, and former State President in particular, consider that
enough was done to put an end to gross human rights violations being
perpetrated by the security arms of the state?

Former members of the security forces have suggested that "the SAP moved
further and further away from normal policing and the rule of law". Can
the National Party explain why this was allowed to happen? Opponents of
the National Party have, in fact, suggested that the security forces were
effectively the armed wing of the National Party. In retrospect, is this
a fair assessment?

Questions arising from submissions of other political parties

1. A document dated 13 March 1990 (ANC submission p. 42 ff) stated that
FW de Klerk was "briefed on a broad spectrum of sensitive projects" and
had given his approval "in principle" on "the running of Stratkom
projects". What was the task of the Stratkom projects? Were covert
operations against Self-Defence Units part of those Stratkom projects?
What about the Adult Education Consultants (AEC) - were they also part of
the projects?

2. Did the NP Government and former President de Klerk know about the
killings of IFP leaders by MK (IFP submission p. 17)? Did the
Government's intelligence agencies work with the ANC's Department of
Intelligence and Security (IFP submission p. 19)?

3. Did former President de Klerk fail to respond to the IFP memorandum
sent to him on 30 September 1993 in regard to the violence directed
against IFP (IFP submission p. 19)?

4. Allegations of "false flag" operations undertaken by security forces
have been made by both the ANC and PAC. General Johan van der Merwe is,
in turn, on record as saying the Khotso House bombing was the work of the
SAP. He further indicates that the operation was authorised by former
President PW Botha and that Minister Adriaan Vlok conveyed the order to
him. Were such operations state security policy? Who authorised such
operations? What was the motive behind them?

5. What was the relationship between security forces and "right-wing"
para-military groups? Did co-operation occur at any stage? If so, please
provide details.

Questions on the SADF and other security structures



The NSMS

1. In your submission to the TRC, you asserted that it was impossible for
any "managers" to have full knowledge of what activities their employees
were engaged in. You suggested that the proper test to be applied is
whether or not a proper control system was put in place, and if abuse
occurred, whether effective steps taken to prevent further abuse.

Do you think the NSMS was a system which effectively prevented abuse and
allowed for steps to be taken against those engaged in abuse? To your
knowledge did any decision of any structure of the NSMS give rise to
actions of an unlawful or unauthorised nature? Please provide an outline
of the NSMS and the chain of command that existed within it.

State Security Council

1. Did the State Security Council (SSC) or any other agency of the State
ever compile lists of "politically sensitive people" in order for action
to be taken against these people? If so, please furnish the TRC with all
such lists. Furthermore, what action was contemplated against such people?

2. Were there any government departments, agencies or institutions which
operated outside the law? If so, which departments. Please furnish
details about their mandate, the scope of their activities and all
actions taken.

3. Did the government ever contemplate the establishment of a "Third
Force" to counter the revolutionary threat? If so, please provide all
details about the deliberations in this regard, including their outcome
and implementation. Did any meeting of the SSC authorise the mobility and
resources of the security forces to be used in "Third Force-type" action
against the revolutionary threat. If so, what was meant by this. Did any
resolution of the SSC authorise the security forces to use the same
methods as revolutionaries to counter the revolutionary threat? If so,
what was contemplated hereby? If this is so, to what extent is it
legitimate to blame "revolutionary strategies adopted by the government's
opponent" for blurring the traditional distinctions between combatants
and non-combatants, legitimate and illegitimate targets and been
acceptable and unacceptable methods of police and military action (NP
submission page 16)?

4. In 1986, the SSC established a sub-committee known by the acronym of
"GVS". What was the purpose of this sub-committee? Please furnish all
details concerning its decisions and activities. Please furnish all
minutes of this committee. Who chaired the GVS? Did this person have any
other responsibilities?

The SSC minutes dated 12 May 1986 read as follows:

"Die Derde Mag moet beweeglik wees met 'n goed opgeleide vermoe om
terroriste effektief uit te wis."

What is meant by the words "uit te wis". Please provide a definition of
the term "terroriste".

5. Why were "unconventional strategies" planned and implemented on a
"need to know" basis? Were they unlawful? If not, in terms of what laws
were they authorised? Provide a list of all operations which formed part
of "unconventional strategies" and/or which operated on a "need to know
basis".

6. With regard to the Strategic Communications branch (Stratcom) of the
SSC, What were the functions of Stratcom? Who was represented on
Stratcom? Who chaired the meetings of Stratcom? Why did Stratcom continue
to exist after the remaining sections of the SSC was scaled down or
abolished State President De Klerk?

7. Please provide a full list of Stratcom operations or projects. Have
these all been closed down? When did this occur? Have any of these
operations been redesigned to facilitate their continued existence? What
was the total cost of Stratcom operations to the state? Were Stratcom
accounts audited? Who undertook the audit?

Involvement by the SADF in domestic politics and security

1. During the 1980s and 1990s the SADF was increasingly drawn into the
internal security situation. When, why and by whom were these decisions
taken? Did their authority extend beyond support for SAP security
operations? Was the SADF given authority to engage in any internal
independent operations? If so, when and why? Were SADF personnel
(traditionally trained to use maximum force) given appropriate training
to deal with internal security operations?

Was the SADF authorised to involve itself in operations that went beyond
security measures? For example, was the SADF involved in Stratcom
activities internally? What were the divisions of responsibility in
relation to intelligence-gathering activities? How and when were these
divisions of responsibility agreed upon?

2. Were the SADF or the SAP ever instructed to engage in actions or
operations designed to discredit the ANC and other anti-apartheid
organisations? Were any of these conducted after 2 February 1990? If so,
please provide details. Were the SADF or the SAP ever instructed to
conduct any action or operation designed to look as though it had been
carried out by the enemy? Please provide details.

3. Did any structures of the SSC or Cabinet authorise Operation Katzen?
Why did the Minister of Defence terminate Katzen in October 1987? Did any
unauthorised or illegal actions take place during this operation?

4. Outline the nature and extent of the support given to Chief Buthelezi
and/or the IFP and/or KZP.

5. Operation Marion represents a clear intention on the part of the SADF
to involve itself in the domestic politics of Kwazulu and Natal. Was this
operation authorised by Cabinet or any structures of the SSC? If so, who
and why was this authorisation given? Was Operation Marion only confined
to training? What cost was involved? When and why was Marion terminated?

6. Did the NP government ever authorise the SADF to supply weaponry at
any stage to forces inside the RSA who were fighting anti-apartheid
groups? Was authorisation ever granted to supply any covert/secret
military or para-military training to any group, other than the IFP,
inside the RSA? Was the SADF ever authorised to participate in the
planning or supporting of any coup attempt in any of the independent
homelands?

7. The court in the Goniwe Inquest found that the SADF, as an
institution, was responsible for the deaths of Goniwe and other deceased.
The Harms Commission, the Webster and the Lubowski inquests also made
potentially incriminating findings in respect of SADF involvement in
other assassinations. Similarly, the investigations by Genl. Pierre Steyn
in 1992/3 suggested a significant degree of unauthorised and illegal
activities and operations within the SADF. How were these allegations
and/or findings acted upon? Does the NP believe that the SADF was
sufficiently accountable? Were any additional mechanisms put into place
to ensure a greater degree of accountability?

The CCB

1. The submission by the former SADF suggests that the CCB was set up in
May 1986. Who authorised this? What was the nature of the relationship
between the CCB and Vlakplaas? What was the total CCB budget? How was
this budget authorised and accounted for? What expenditure was involved
in closing down operations for the CCB? What sums of money were paid to
individuals in termination and retrenchment packages? What were the lines
of accountability and command between the SADF and other structures of
government and/or security? To your knowledge did the CCB authorise any
actions of an unlawful nature? Why was the CCB only closed down in
February 1994 if its activities ceased in April 1990? Were there any
attempts by individuals or any component of the SADF to gain
authorisation for a CCB type structure after 1990?

Cross-border raids

1. The task of the TRC includes the investigation of gross human rights
violations by/of South Africans beyond our borders. To what extent was
the government of the day involved in unlawful acts in other states? Were
neighbouring states destabilised as a matter of policy? To what extent
was there co-operation between South African security forces and the
security forces or secret agents in other states? Who authorised
operations in other states? What was the intended purpose of these
activities?

2. If cross-border operations had to be authorised, a full list of these
operations must be available. Who were the targets and who was eventually
killed?

3. The SADF submission states that aside from "hot-pursuit" and
reconnaissance missions, the planning of all other acts "had to be
referred to the Chairman of SSC for his decision, in consultation with
those members of the SSC he decided to involve". What is the meaning of
"those members of the SSC he decided to involve"? Who were they? Did
certain people regularly attend? Was this an ad hoc group? Who authorised
these meetings? What provision existed for them to be held? Are any of
these directives reflected in law? Are there any minutes and decisions of
the meetings?

4. The SADF was involved in the following external operations against
what were described as ANC and PAC bases:

Mozambique: 30 January 1981; 23 May 1983; 17 October 1983.
Lesotho: 9 December 1982.
Botswana: 14 June 1985; 19 May 1986; 28 March 1988.
Zimbabwe: 19 May 1986.
Zambia:19 May 1986.
Transkei: 17 October 1993.

There were also raids on alleged SWAPO bases - notably Kassinga on May
1978. Who authorised each of these particular raids? What was the role of
Cabinet in making each of these decisions? What was the role of the
Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Defence and their respective
departments? What was the role of the State President or then Prime
Minister? How were targets selected? What efforts did Cabinet make to
ensure that such intelligence was accurate and up-to-date? What
casualties were incurred? How many of these were non-ANC or PAC members
or bases/facilities no longer used by the ANC or PAC? Did Cabinet issue
any operational guidelines to those engaged in cross-border raids? Were
the Geneva Protocols adhered to? Was the SAP ever involved in
cross-border raids? If so, on whose authority? Can operational reports be
made available?

5. On 9 August 1975 South African troops crossed the Angolan border and
took control of the Calueque and Ruacana dams. This first step resulted
in an extended war. Was this done with the knowledge of the Prime
Minister and the Cabinet? Was the National Party parliamentary caucus
informed? What strategic objectives were seen to be served by this action
and according to which provisions of international law was such action
justified?

Support to guerrilla movements in foreign countries

1. What financial and military support was rendered to UNITA up to the
signing of the New York agreement? What was the nature of the
humanitarian aid provided to UNITA following this agreement? What
mechanisms were put in place to ensure that such support was used only
for humanitarian purposes? What was the role of the Ministers of Defence
and Foreign Affairs in respect of support for UNITA? What was the role of
the State President or then Prime Minister?

2. What was the purpose of relocating Renamo forces in South Africa from
what was then Rhodesia? Who authorised this decision? What were the
intended objectives of the decision? What operational guidelines or
orders were given to the SADF regarding Renamo? Did Cabinet ever
authorise the SADF to issue operational orders to Renamo or command any
of their operations? What other countries were involved in providing
support or acting as a conduit for aid to Renamo?

3. The Gorongosa documents seized at Renamo HQ in August 1985 reflected
continued South African support for Renamo in violation of the Nkomati
Accord. In the opinion of the National Party, what is the status of these
documents? Define the nature of the relationship between the South
African government and Renamo after the signing of the Accord and outline
the extent, if any, of all support given to Renamo subsequent to the
Nkomati Accord.

4. Was the NP government involved in supporting any other movements or
organisations in other countries that sought to overthrow or influence
the policies of those countries? What was the nature of this support? Was
authorisation ever granted to supply weaponry to resistance/ terrorist
groups in other countries?

Chemical Biological Warfare

1. Did the Cabinet or the SSC at any stage authorise a Chemical
Biological Warfare programme? If so, why was this deemed necessary? What,
if any, guidelines were issued and what were the lines of accountability?
Was authorisation ever given for chemical or biological weapons to be
used outside of laboratory conditions? What was the extent and nature of
field testing? Who specifically was targetted for field testing? Who
oversaw this testing? Who authorised the testing? Was authorisation ever
granted to any structure to poison food or water in ANC or PAC camps, or
the water supply of any other country or organisation?

2. There are allegations that ANC and other operatives were poisoned by
South African security personnel, The names of Thami Zulu, Francis Meli
and Solly Smith are mentioned as possible targets of such operations.
Comment is invited. If such operations were carried out, who authorised
them? Who made the poison available? Who carried out the operations?

3. What level of co-operation did South Africa enjoy with other countries
concerning CBW? Which were these countries?

Questions on the destruction of documents

1. Kindly outline the steps taken by the government to ensure that the
agreement on the Currin court application in September 1993, preventing
the destruction of documents due of a "classified" nature, was honoured.
[See Supreme Court of South Africa (Transvaal Provincial Division)
September 1993: Matter between Brian Currin and the State President of
the Republic of South Africa, the Minister of National Education, the
Director of Archives, the Director General of the National Intelligence
Service.]

2. Gen. Klopper testified to the Harms Commission at the SANDF submission
on 21 October 1996 that the only documents available on the CCB were
those handed in to the Commission. What documents were destroyed prior to
Harms Commission on the CCB? Who was responsible for deciding what
documents on the CCB to preserve, and what documents to destroy?

3. Between April 1993 and May 1994 the Defence Force had to gain the
written approval of Genl. Pierre Steyn, then Chairperson of the Steyn
Commission of Investigation into irregular military activities, prior to
the destruction of documents. How did the office of the State President
monitor this procedure? Were documents destroyed without Genl. Steyn's
approval? If so, which documents were destroyed? Why were they destroyed?
Who ordered the destruction?

4. Within this period (April 1993 - May 1994) Mr. Johan Mostert, Head of
the Security Secretariat, gave written instructions in a circular dated
July 1993 to all government departments and the SADF to destroy all
copies of classified intelligence records in their possession, that did
not originate in their respective departments. Special mention is made of
the need to destroy copies of documents originating in the NSMS. Were the
original NSMS documents preserved? Where are they located now?
Alternatively, were the originals destroyed and was the circular a
deliberate attempt to destroy all traces of NSMS documentation? Who
authorised the circular?

5. At the Johannesburg Amnesty Hearings in October 1996, Brig. Cronje
testified to "massive document destruction" prior to the elections in
1993-4. What departments were responsible? What was destroyed? By whom?

6. Genl. George Meiring is on record concerning the destruction of
documentation by the SADF. Was this done with the authority of the
cabinet? What documents were destroyed? Does a list of these destroyed
documents exist? Why were they destroyed? Who destroyed the documents?

Questions on recommendations

1. Section 4(h) of the Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act
requires that the TRC should make recommendations to the President with
regard to legal, administrative and institutional measures that should be
taken to prevent human rights abuse. What recommendations (if any) would
the NP make in the following areas:

Safety and Security
Defence
Justice
Correctional Services
Intelligence
Education

Are there any recommendations, with regard to preventing human rights
abuse, which fall outside these areas that the NP would like to make?

Questions on reparation and rehabilitation

1. The National Party states its conviction that the country owes the
victims of apartheid "a great debt of gratitude and some or other form of
reparation" (p.29). How much of the payment of this debt must be funded
by the state, and how much through other sources? Will the National Party
be willing to contribute to the President's Fund?

2. The submission further indicates that the National Party commits
itself to "support all reasonable guidelines" on reparation and
rehabilitation. Can you expand on the statement? What guidelines do you
offer?

3. What specific contribution can the National Party offer to support
applications for amnesty?

4. How many individuals benefited from the State President's Fund For
Victims of Terrorist Attacks or other such funds? Can you provide us with
a list of beneficiaries as well as with the details of compensation of
all forms awarded to them?

6. The Promotion of National Unity and Reconciliation Act, No. 34, 1995
requires that we make recommendations on the reparation and
rehabilitation of victims. The views of your party on this matter will be
appreciated. The nation has limited resources, there are a range of
initiatives included in the Reconstruction and Development Programme -
and yet, there are individuals and communities who suffered in a specific
way as a result of gross human rights violations. What is the obligation
of the nation towards these people? What forms of memory, rehabilitation
and reparation are reasonably possible?


