
		

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 26/28-08-96		NAME: WENDY SIZEKA RAMATHE

						 FRANCINA NTOPELA

CASE: EC /96		UITENHAGE

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Are you both going to swear?

PANEL MEMBER: What is your name?

Francina Ntopela is my name.

WENDY SIZEKA RAMATHE: (Sworn duly states).

FRANCINA NTOPELA: (Sworn duly states).

CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you ladies and we thank you that you have come to
appear before this

Commission. We shall now hand over to Revd Xundu to lead the witness.

REVD. XUNDU: Thank you Mr Chairman.

	We greet you Wendy. By the way where is your home Wendy?

MS RAMATHE: My home is in New Brighton.

REVD. XUNDU: What is your clan name?

MS RAMATHE: My clan name is Madiba.

REVD. XUNDU: By the way, your story states that you were working for the
Department of Health and

Welfare here in Port Elizabeth. Could you now tell this Commission what
work were you doing at the time?

MS RAMATHE: I Wendy Ramathe used to work for the Department of Health and
we used to look at the

welfare of the people and this was a very big job.

	On the 29th July 1986, I used to work with Albertina Dlanjwa.

REVD. XUNDU: Just before the 29th, could you tell us that you also used
to deliver food parcels together

with Albertina and people used to queue up for these food parcels. These
were people from Soweto, is that

true?

MS RAMATHE: Yes, it is like that.

REVD. XUNDU: Now, when did it all start that you should be suspected,
whereby people started to have

doubts about you?

MS RAMATHE: We used to work hand in hand with the people and this
suspicion that people had later on,

became a surprise to us. We used to look into the needs of the people.
Then on the 29th July, I got a

telephone call from Albertina's husband, telling me that Mrs Dlanjwa was
not well and he was asking me to

accompany her to see a doctor in Corsten.

	At 3.30 after my rounds I then went to Mrs Dlanjwa's house and there
were visitors from Transkei

and some other people who had problems, because that is what they used to
do, since we did not have an

office of our own. People used to come to us and then we would look into
their needs and their problems and

give what is appropriate.

	Firstly, in that Zwide area, we saw that there was suffering and a lot
of facilities were lacking, there

were no creches, this was not the first project. There used to be a house
owned by the Municipality in

Siyongwana, so we investigated and looked at this house to be used as a
creche.

	In 1982 we got it and some children were kept there and it was named
Ntlalontle, because it was

expressing that we wanted good health for our people.

	People from the locality worked there. Then again, we could see that
some people were sending

children to this creche when they were actually doing nothing. We decided
to keep these elderly people busy.

So as to curb their suffering we taught them wonderbox, we taught them
how to knit socks and even the

young women who were unemployed, we decided to keep them occupied by
teaching them handwork.

REVD. XUNDU: I remember that you had a remarkable work, which was well
known to most people at the

time?

MS RAMATHE: Yes, it is like that.

REVD. XUNDU: I am listening to your story. I now want you to tell us
about this particular incident of the

day which gave you a great shock, because there had been no indication
that people were not in favour of

this? I still remember even the "roldebuck" that used to be sold there.
So, you found people throwing petrol

bombs at you?

MS RAMATHE: On the 29th, a young boy of about 15 years came into my house
and I was from work. In

front, I was with Mrs Dlanjwa who was talking on the telephone and there
were two elderly women next to

the door.

	This boy passed and I saw him cutting and disconnecting the phone and I
was shocked. He was

dressed in a Khaki shorts and I saw him taking out something that he hit
on the floor and I could see it was a

petrol bomb. Thereafter there was fire.

	My first reaction was to jump for these old people who were sitting next
to the door and Mrs

Dlanjwa also helped me. There were people in the bedroom, here in Mrs
Dlanjwa's house. They screamed,

called out "Wendy, your head is on fire", and then I tried to put off the
fire. We ran towards the kitchen and

this boy again exploded another petrol bomb and there was a big flame in
front and at the back and there was

no way out. The doors were locked with burglar proofs.

REVD. XUNDU: Do you think the neighbours were responsible for this or do
you think that this was

politically motivated?

MS RAMATHE: What I think is that there is some political influence in all
this because, a little bit after that,

at the time we were burning, there was one child who pulled the burglar
door and we saw a hippo parked

outside as we were jumping out through the window.

REVD. XUNDU: What was this hippo doing?

MS RAMATHE: There were some white men standing next to the hippo, they
were just watching. They

were not doing anything because as I was going out I could see they were
just standing and doing nothing.

REVD. XUNDU: You say, in that house there used to be mealie meal and so
on. Did the people do any

looting on that day.

MS RAMATHE: The one sitting next to me is the one who had a chance to see
everything because I just

went out and ran out.

REVD. XUNDU: Did you identify any of these people who attacked your home?
Is she the one who is

going to answer, if so, then give her a chance.

	Mama, tell us how are you connected to this story, just tell us, were
you just an eye witness or do

you have a lot of information as you were the person who was helping Mrs
Dlanjwa?

MS NTOPELA: Mrs Nontsikelelo Dlanjwa is my sister. She comes after me.
When I left my house, she was

booked off by the doctor because of high blood pressure.

	I did my washing and I decided to go and help her. When I got there, I
found Mrs Myila who is our

sister-in-law together with her son. My sister was sleeping in the
bedroom and they were all in one bedroom.

I helped with whatever, preparing food. In front there was an office and
there were two women there in that

office. Mrs Wendy who used to work with my sister came. At the time there
was this telephone call from my

niece, I thought it was for me, but Mrs Ramethe Wendy said, "No, the
telephone call was for Mrs Dlanjwa"

who went out of the bedroom to receive the telephone call.

	I then decided to go and take the washing from outside with the
intention to prepare supper. For a

short while, I just went out and I looked round and I saw some smoke and
this house was facing some

shacks. I thought the smoke was from the shacks and I saw more and more
smoke coming out of one of the

windows from my sister's house. I then turned, when I was getting into
the yard, my sister was in flames and

she was wrapped in an apron and I heard her crying "why are you burning
me, why don't you tell me when

you are dissatisfied".

	When I got into the yard, I saw some young boys. Billy was one of them,
Mongezi of Mgengo was

another one. Matega from Mgengo was another one, Temba.

	All these children, Temba came from Fumba and Maboetie was one of them.
They were of the

same family, the Gondwana family.

REVD. XUNDU: Are these children still there?

MS NTOPELA: They were masked and they were coming out of my sister's
house.

REVD. XUNDU: Do you still see them? After that incident, do you see them
now or you last saw them

then?

MS NTOPELA: They are there, they were there, I remember that after that
incident, there was a story that

Albertina was stealing some clothes and sending them to Transkei and this
was dismissed by the comrades

and there was no press report on this. These children said they were
members of the UDF and when this

happened, some elderly guys came to my house, but I just can't recall
their names.

	They told me that Mrs Dlanjwa used to work with them as a member of the
UDF and these children

who had done this had been sent and bought to do all this. They said UDF
was not responsible for this act.

REVD. XUNDU: If you can recall, in that statement of Mkuseli Jack, he
tried to distance the UDF and said

this was just a criminal act that they cannot promote. Do you still
remember that?

MS NTOPELA: Yes, I do.

REVD. XUNDU: After this, was there any way of getting hold of these
people who were responsible for

this act?

MS NTOPELA: Firstly, I must say at the there was this fire, the hippo's
came immediately as if they had

been nearby expecting this act.

	They used a hosepipe to extinguish the fire and it was supposed to be a
person to take guard of that

house according to the government police. But what these soldiers did was
that they just drove out and left

no-one in guard. A certain detective was sent there and he claimed that
he did not want to associate himself

with that because he had just come from Port Elizabeth and he had to
investigate.

REVD. XUNDU: Was there a court case after this act?

MS NTOPELA: They were collected, these children, and then when we sent
another one to go and check

whether they had collected the right people, then this boy who we had
sent said he got scared because these

children were changing in appearance, so he got scared and he did not
bring any definite information to us

and it just ended there.

CHAIRPERSON: Sizeka we are going to hand over to you.

REVD. XUNDU: Was there any investigation or any case on this act?

MS RAMATHE: I was called to the New Brighton Court where I was asked to
identify these people. I

couldn't, except that I could identify that Mongezi who had come on that
day and unfortunately he was not

there in court on the day.

	After that I was not happy, that was after I had been discharged from
hospital, because at that time I

was in hospital, people kept on threatening me and when this one died,
they said I would be the next.

REVD. XUNDU: Now, these people were just threatening you. Even of Mkuseli
Jack had made that

statement to distance the UDF from this act?

MS RAMATHE: Yes, that was the time that I was not happy, even in my
house, I didn't leave my house by

choice, I was compelled to.

REVD. XUNDU: So, there was no court case of this incident?

MS RAMATHE: There was, because I say I did go to the New Brighton Court
but nothing happened.

REVD. XUNDU: What are your wishes as you have come before this
Commission. What would you like

this Commission to do about this matter?

MS RAMATHE: Before I could state my wish, I would like to expantiate and
say, in all the work that we

used to do with Mrs Dlanjwa, we were working mainly with some white
people like Molly Blackburn. I still

recall a certain incident where there were floods in Veeplass. We were
working with them and there are so

many things that they used to help us with.

	They would even lead us and show us the correct channels to follow
whenever there was any

problem.

REVD. XUNDU: Just on that point, now do you think this is what made these
people to have this

suspicions. Do you think that there was a third force that influenced the
youth?

MS RAMATHE: Yes, I think there was a third force because I remember one
other day in Veeplaas as we

were standing, we were taking food all over the place. We were standing
there with Molly Blackburn and

Mrs Dlanjwa was there too and we were working. Mrs Molly said, there were
some whites who said "are we

working with this Molly Blackburn" and there were some nasty remarks that
were making us unhappy.

REVD. XUNDU: So, your suspicion is that these youth were being supported
by some police from the

government as if what you were doing was not favoured by the comrades. Is
that your suspicion?

MS RAMATHE: Yes.

REVD. XUNDU: That was the last time you worked?

MS RAMATHE: At the time this happened my husband had been retrenched and
I was the breadwinner

because my children were very young at the time. In July 1986, I then got
injured and then there was no way

of survival for my family and then we decided to leave Port Elizabeth for
King Williamstown to go and stay

with my parents.

	It was very tough during these years. From 1986 to this year and it is
only just a few months that I

have just got a job at one creche.

REVD. XUNDU: Did you get any pension?

MS RAMATHE: Yes, I got 5% pension from work. I had many burns on my head.
I have got no ear

because it got burnt and when I am sitting, I have got to support myself.

REVD. XUNDU: What did they say at your work?

MS RAMATHE: They just decided to book me off and they didn't give me any
substantial amount. All they

gave me was R7000 for burning and I had to live on this amount for
several years because my husband was

unemployed.

REVD. XUNDU: Then what happened to your house?

MS RAMATHE: When they moved from Mrs Dlanjwa's house, they moved onto my
house. They looted

everything, my furniture, they took everything that they wanted to from
my house.

REVD. XUNDU: Was it general looting?

MS RAMATHE: Yes.

REVD. XUNDU: The policemen too, did not investigate on this matter?

MS RAMATHE: No. My father who was there tried to stop them, but to no
avail. So the people said we

were working with the system and I just couldn't tell how. It was just
something to deflate us.

REVD. XUNDU: You said you have now, you would like to state your wishes.
What would you like this

Commission to do for you?

MS RAMATHE: My wish is that you should investigate who the instigators of
this act were. I need my

furniture and everything of mine, because in 1991 my husband was
threatened that he should not come back

from exile clever and demanding his things.

	I am always nervous, I am afraid of crowds. I am not trusting because I
can't take it that I used to

work in close connection with the community, but today I find that I am
now an enemy to my enemy.

Wherever I am, I feel untrusted and I also don't trust.

REVD. XUNDU: Thank you lady. I still remember this period and I know how
you feel. I am now going to

hand over to other Commissioners who may have some questions to ask.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Wendy Ramethe we wish to thank you for coming before
this Commission to tell us

this pathetic story. We remember the time when this incident occurred. We
people who come from afar, we

thought that when there was word that this incident was not connected
with the political organisations, we

thought that it would be the end of everything and what would be left
would only be the accident you met

together with Mrs Dlanjwa.

	It is very painful now to hear after the incident, you still became
unhappy and you were harassed to

an extent that you had to live a lonely life in your community. This
causes much pain to us.

	There is one thing that we have always said here that we should ask the
policemen and soldiers

whose names are mentioned frequently as perpetrators, that they should
come forward before this

Commission. We therefore would like to make another plea to these young
men you have mentioned here,

who are three in number, that they should come forward

forward. Their names are Mongezi (surname unknown), Themba Ngodwane is
one of them and Billy Pemba

to come and explain what exactly happened, to this Commission.

	The Human Rights Violation are not only done by policemen and soldiers
or whites, they are just

human rights violation whether they are done by people who call
themselves comrades, so we therefore

make this loud call to these three people who have been mentioned that
they should come before this

Commission whilst time permits. To come and tell us what exactly happened.

	We know that this will not give back your true health, you have been
damaged and you will enjoy

ill-health until you die, but we still want to know the exact truth of
what actually happened and also to know

who was the perpetrator and also if they did this on political motivation
they should state why they did it and

who had sent them.

	We would also like to extend our sympathy to you and all the things that
you have asked from us,

we shall look into them and as I said to you earlier, there is one thing
that we cannot restore to you and that is

your good health. Thank you.

	------------------------





	8	W S RAMATHE





UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

