	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	10-02-1996	NAME:	VELILE WILLIE RAMNCWANA

CASE: CRADOCK

DAY 1



REVD FINCA:	We welcome you Mr Velile Ramncwana. Reverend Xundu is going
to help you to take an oath, after that he will lead you with questions
on behalf of the Commission.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairman. Will you please stand up sir.

VELILE WILLIE RAMNCWANA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Sir, which clan do you belong to?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I am Nyawhoza.

REVD XUNDU:	Mr Nyawhoza, your story here says that in 1965 you were
arrested for being a member of POQO, can you please tell us in your own
words what happened, thank you.

MR RAMNCWANA:	In 1965 I was in Steynsburg at the time, in October, the
16th of October, we were taken out of the township. It was during the
night, I was taken to prison.

	When I got to prison the police were throwing water all over us the
whole night and in the morning they took us to Colesberg and they kept us
there.

	In Colesberg, it was on Saturday, while we were still there, it was
Sunday and we were still there and on Monday, we were still there. On
Tuesday, we were taken to the offices to be questioned.

	Dumzela was the first one to be taken there. When he arrived there, he
didn't come back to our cell. When I was called, Velile Ramncwana, come
out and they opened the door, this Detective came to take me from the
cell. When I arrived at the office, there were three Detectives there,
Xhosa Detectives, and they showed me a list.

	I asked them what is on this list and they said to me Dumzela wrote on
that list and I have to do the same and then I discovered that POQO was
not existing according to what they were telling me.

	They were beating me and I was on the floor. They were taking face
bricks, five face bricks on each side and they gave me two face bricks
and I took them, I stood up and they were too heavy for me and I dropped
them.

	They beat me after that, they tortured me. At about half past three in
the afternoon, they released me, they took me back to the cell. When I
arrived at the cell, I slept and my ears were bleeding. I slept with one
side and others were also taken out one by one and they transferred me to
Norpoort.

	When I arrived at Norpoort, it was six of us and they put us in the
cell, a black cell. At that cell, they did not open the door, flies were
all over the place, they did not give us any water there.

	On Wednesday, one police lorry came and we were transferred to Cradock.
We asked them where are you taking us, they said we are taking you to a
place where you've never been.

	They took us to Cradock to an old prison. We used to go to the office to
be questioned there.

REVD XUNDU:	Why were they arresting you?

MR RAMNCWANA:	They said we were members of POQO.

REVD XUNDU:	Did they say that you were in an organisation which was
banned?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, they said that we were belonging to POQO and our
intention was to kill Boers.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you sentenced?

MR RAMNCWANA:	When we arrived at Cradock, we stayed in prison until
December and in March they took us to Port Elizabeth, in Rooi Hell prison.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you sentenced at that time?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No, we were not sentenced. We went to Rooi Hell and then we
were questioned there. On the 1st of April, they said that we were found
guilty. But they said that we were not guilty, but we are guilty because
we were members of POQO. It was then that we were sentenced.

	And then after that, we were transferred to Braamvlei in Cape Town, in
Worcester and we worked there for six months. After that six months, we
were transferred to Victor Verster in Paarl, where we worked for a long
time.

	And when the time came for us to be released, I was taken to Benoni
prison, near Paarl. We were a lot and we stayed there until we were
released and we were taken home. And then when the time came, we were
taken home.

REVD XUNDU:	For how long were you sentenced?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I was sentenced for three years.

REVD XUNDU:	And then you were released and you came back home?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, I came back home.

REVD XUNDU:	These police who came to you to take you, do you still
remember their names?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No, I don't their names, but they were from Colesberg. They
took me with a blanket at night to the van.

REVD XUNDU:	So there is no one you can recognize?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No.

REVD XUNDU:	After you came back, did you manage to get employment?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I stayed for a long time without getting any employment,
but eventually I did get a job. I was mending shoes.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. As you are here in front of his Commission, do you
have any requests to this Commission? Do you want us to assist you in
some way?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes sir. I would like you to help me with my medical
treatment because I can hardly hear now as my ear drums were damaged.

REVD XUNDU:	Is there anything else?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you have children?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, I have many children.

REVD XUNDU:	You don't even know others?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No, I do know my children. I have nine children, but they
are old, they are grown up.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. They are supporting themselves?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Nyawhoza, I would hand over to the Chairperson,
thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you. Tiny Maya?

MS MAYA:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Ramncwana, I follow that there are
other people that were arrested with you, do you still remember their
names?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, I do remember them, but others have passed away.

MS MAYA:	Can you please give us a few names?

MR RAMNCWANA:	The first one is Ngemntu Xatu.

MS MAYA:	Where is he now?

MR RAMNCWANA:	He is in Steynsburg.

MR MAYA:	Do you have his details? Where can we find him? We would like
you to give us his details afterwards. Who is another one?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Another one is Linyusile Mzdi, he is also in Steynsburg.

MS MAYA:	What about Dumzela, the one you mentioned, who is he?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Dumzela is the surname.

MS MAYA:	Is he the one who is in Steynsburg?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No, he is in Matatiele.

MS MAYA:	Is he still alive?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I don't know, but I think he is still alive.

MS MAYA:	This POQO organisation, what was it, what was the organisation
doing as you were arrested?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I was not doing anything, I was just a member.

MS MAYA:	Were you just a member?	

MR RAMNCWANA:	No, at that time I was not a member.

MS MAYA:	The others who were arrested together with you, were they
members of POQO?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No, they were not members of POQO.

MS MAYA:	Why do you think the police said that you were members of POQO,
what was your involvement with POQO? What was your involvement in the
community?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I think that the police were just accusing us.

MS MAYA:	Were you involved in any political activities at that time?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No.

REVD FINCA:	June Crichton?

MS CRICHTON:	Mr Ramncwana, I would like to ask your opinion about
something. Can you hear me? Can you hear me? I am sorry to put you to
this trouble of putting those earphones on, but I need to ask your
opinion about something. Could you tell me why you think the authorities
transferred you to no less than seven different prisons in the time that
you were sentenced? That is the first question.

	The second is to ask you were those the three years that you were
sentenced for, the times that you were transferred, or did you do the
sentence after that?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I was sentenced in Port Elizabeth and then I was
transferred to Brandvlei, from there I was taken to Paarl. From Paarl I
was taken to Benoni and I was sentenced at that time.

MS CRICHTON:	Let us go back to my first question. What do you think was
the reason for them moving you around so much? Did they move just you or
were they moving everybody who were part of this organisation around like
that?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Everybody was transferred from one place to another, we
were 56 in total and we were all shifted from one place to another.

MS CRICHTON:	Why do you think did they do that?

MR RAMNCWANA:	I don't know, but I still want to know why they were doing
that to us.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Sandi?

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Ramncwana, I would ask you three
questions with the intention of trying to find out that when people who
were arrested in the 1960's, how were they treated? There are very few
people who appear in front of this Commission, complaining about what
happened to them in the 1960's.

	Firstly, at the time you appeared in court, did you have any legal
representative?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No.

MR SANDI:	Do you have anything to say concerning the court case, the
procedures of the court case, how the Magistrate and the Prosecutor
handled your case as you were not legally represented?

MR RAMNCWANA:	We were sentenced for three years because there was no one
representing us. And they said that because we were called at POQO
people, we will be sentenced for three years, but it is clear that we
were not guilty, but as we were allegedly belonging to POQO, we will be
sentenced for three years.

MR SANDI:		I am not sure, Mr Ramncwana, whether my question is clear to
you. I request you to tell us clearly what was happening in court? Were
you satisfied with the procedures of the court?

MR RAMNCWANA:	No, we were not satisfied sir, but because the Magistrate
said I sentence you for three years, but you are not guilty, we were not
satisfied about that, because we didn't know why we were found guilty.

MR SANDI:	How long did this case last?

MR RAMNCWANA:	We came from Cradock with Magistrate Koen to Port Elizabeth.

MR SANDI:	On the day when your case was in court, did it take the whole
day or two days, or three days? I am not talking about when you go to
court and then the case is being postponed, but I am asking you for how
long did this case take place?

MR RAMNCWANA:	It was only one day and then they told us to

come the next day to be sentenced.

MR SANDI:	You said that this case took only one day? How many were you?

MR RAMNCWANA:	We were 56 in total.

MR SANDI:	You were 56 in total?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, we were 56.

MR SANDI:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Velile, the 56 people you have mentioned, were they from
the same place or from different places?

MR RAMNCWANA:	They were all from Steynsburg. They were all coming from
Steynsburg.

REVD FINCA:	And all these people were accused of being POQO members?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Sandi?

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. I apologize Mr Ramncwana for coming
back to you. At the time when you were in court, was it during the day or
at night?

MR RAMNCWANA:	It was during the day.

MR SANDI:	Were you all given a chance to respond to this case?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, we were responding to this case.

MR SANDI:	Do you mean all of you, the 56 of you had a chance to answer
for yourselves?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, we did.

MR SANDI:	I am sure that you all said that you were innocent?

MR RAMNCWANA:	Yes, we said that we were innocent.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Ramncwana.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Velile Ramncwana, we thank you. Thank you for reminding us
about the 1960's and for reminding us about the activities of POQO,
although you are denying that you were a member of POQO.

	I know that our people suffered a lot. As a result now they cannot
differentiate or they cannot know where to deny or to accept
responsibility, but all of us, those who know the history of this
country, we remember the activities of POQO in this country - to keep the
light when the times were dark in this country.

	Many people were arrested at that time as you were telling us your
story. Thank you for reminding us about that time. Many people who are
active today, they started being active during the 1990's when things
were getting better.

	They started to be involved. We thank you for reminding us that there
are people who were active in those dark days when things were very bad.
When there was no hope for life and we salute these people as heroes of
our country, because it is easy to be active when things are better, it
is very hard to be active when days are dark and things are very
difficult, when we are only dreaming of liberation.

	We thank you for reminding us about that time. There are questions that
we will make a follow up about in your story, together with the 56
people, if they are still alive. For now, we thank you and we promise
that we will follow your story, thank you.

	--------------------

