	1	E RAMORWAGADI


	1	E RAMORWAGADI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: EDWARD RAMORWAGADI

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

.... hit me, while I was still in the air. And outside they threw me on
the ground and they said to me lie on the floor.

One of the soldiers stepped with his boots on my neck and they asked me
where Moses Mokwena stayed. He was also one of the leaders, he was the
President of the Huhudi Youth Organization.

	I told them I don't know where he stays and there was also Mike, who was
a Security Branch Officer and he said, Tiger knows about this person. The
Security Police Branch knew me as Tiger and he said I know where this
other guy is. When I told them I don't know where he is. When I told I
don't know where this other person is they started assaulting me again
and they put me into the van where my finger got hit by the police van's
door. And they said I must show them where Moses Mokwena is and I know
where he stays. I told them I don't know where he stays and they tried to
threaten me again and I said I know where he stays.

	And then I went to show them where Moses Mokwena stays. Before we
arrived at his place other policemen were already there. When we arrived
there the people from Moses Mokwena's home were also kicked and
assaulted. Even the older women were being attacked.	

	Before that, at my place, really things were very bad because my father
who was on pension, they also kicked him MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	E RAMORWAGADI

around. And they removed him from the house also. Threw him outside and
said to him, lie down on the floor. I was together with the younger child
who was 15 years old and I heard the child screaming. When he reached the
floor they stepped with boots on him. I also heard my cousin at home who
couldn't hear well. He also couldn't talk, but he could talk a little
bit, although he couldn't talk clearly.

	When they entered his room they also attacked him and he tried to
explain to them that he couldn't speak and they didn't care. They also
made him to lie down on the ground.

	When we were at Mokwena's place.. From Mokwena's place we went to
Godfrey's place. Also at Godfrey's place they started slapping all the
women and Mokwena's father was also assaulted and they made them also to
lie down on the ground. 	From there they took us to Romotletse's place.
There were very many police cars together with the ones of the soldiers.
That is why I said there were many in numbers.

	When we arrived at Ramothletse's place I saw them hitting Abraham's
mother with fists. She was a very old woman and they also threw her on
the ground and told her to lie down. They also took us to the police
station.

	At the police station there were units ready. There was a unit for
Edward Ramorwagadi, for Edwin Moloanwa and for Moses Mokwena. Four of
then were waiting for me. They picked me up. I couldn't realise were they
soldiers or police, but they were white men. They put me into the boot.
While they were putting me into the boot the other security branch man
and he said, where is he? And they said to him, he is in the boot. And
they took me out. They blindfolded me, they took me into their car.

	They pressed against the ground so that I cannot see

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	3	E RAMORWAGADI

anything. We drove about five or ten minutes and they took me out of the
car and they now used their hand to cover my eyes. They were pushing me.
They pushed me into a house and there was a bed in that house.

	As I have mentioned it was four white men. I can't remember if they were
policemen or soldiers. They were heavily built. You could see they were
trained to really assault people.

	They started assaulting me, kicking me with their boots, slapping me and
they said, yes we got you terrorists today. You will tell us where you
got the hand grenades from. And I said to them, no we don't use any
bombs, we don't use any hand grenades. They said you are just the same as
the ANC, you are lying. And we said to them we are telling you the truth,
we don't use any violence. We are not a violent group.

	While I was talking to them like that they kept on assaulting me. They
would hit you as if you have robbed them in the past. They were asking me
where Kebukali was and I said to them no, I don't know his whereabouts.
They asked me, when did you last see him? I said I saw him yesterday.

	They kept on insisting that I should know his whereabouts. I said no, I
don't know. They asked me where Edwin Molalwa slept on Friday. I said no,
we were staying together with him at home. They said on Friday, Edwin was
not at home and they thought it was on the day that bombs or grenades
were thrown. I said no, he was at home.

	They kept on assaulting me and they took a broomstick and they said we
are now hanging you. Now they wanted to lift me up. They said to us, tell
us where you exploded the MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	4	E RAMORWAGADI

bombs. I said no, we don't use any explosions in our organization.

	Continually assaulting us, they said you will tell us the truth and they
were insulting me. The took the broomstick, they hit me until it broke.

	They came with Molalwe but I couldn't recognise him, because they
assaulted him in such a way that I couldn't recognise him. They said he
was not at your place on Friday. I said to them he was there and they
couldn't give him any chance whatsoever to defend himself. I told them
that I was with Edwin the whole day.

	They wanted to know from us why we were really chasing the Councillors.
We said no, we were not after the Councillors. They asked us what the
Councillors have done wrong to us because the Councillors are there for
the people, they don't have to be pestered.

	And we told them that the Councillors are placed there by the white
people to increase their rents, not to give us

electricity and everything. And they said, right are you now aware that
you are really chasing the Councillors. And I told them continually,
gentlemen we are a non-violent group, but they continually assaulted me
and this took about three to four hours. And they left me.

		I looked outside and I realised that we were now on a farm because I
saw cows outside. It was a very big house with many rooms but we were put
in different rooms. We could only hear the cries from the different rooms.

	They took us back to the police station. They wanted to take our names
down. They asked us who the members of our families were, they asked
about our girlfriends. They asked us where we got money from to buy
beautiful clothes. MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	5	E RAMORWAGADI

They were writing that kind of information and they left us.

	One other thing that happened to me. It was when I was working at the
Northern Cape Development Board. I was a cashier. When they came to pick
me up it was in 1985. I was promoted to a relieving supervisor. They
arrived at about half past six. They have spent three weeks searching for
me and they couldn't find me and I was able to come to work normally and
then leave after work.

	When they arrived at half past six it was very early and you couldn't
see people in the streets because of the mist.

I had to be at work at nine but I always were there at half past six and
work and then come back at three o'clock to find out whether they were
there to search for me. Because at that stage the leaders of the people
were wanted by the police.

	They then came at half past six, it was Strydom, he was a manager, and
Maritz. Maritz was the Superintendent. I was shocked to see that the
Superintendent was also a policeman. They were full and in large numbers
clearing R1 rifles. And I asked Strydom, Mr Strydom what is the matter
now? And he said to me you have to go to the brewery, the manager wants
to see you. I asked him why does he want to see me. And he said, you will
hear from him.

	I went to wrap up what I was doing and then he said, please go. And then
I went out to get Solomon Modise who is one of the supervisors and he
said he will complete the job that I was doing. I was glad that Mr
Solomon Modise saw me when they picked me up.

	And they took me to the Municipal Offices. When we arrived there I asked
them, gentlemen where are you taking MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	6	E RAMORWAGADI

me to? Didn't you say you were taking me to the brewery? Strydom left us
and then he went to continue with his work.

	The police left with me and took me to the police station in the city.
When we arrived at the police station they didn't even take me to the
charge office to write my name down or to tell me that they were
arresting me. They went through the corridors and they put me in an
office.

	I was alone in that office. Mabilo came and he asked me, what do you
want here. And I said, no I don't know that they wanted. He asked me what
my name was and I said, Edward. And he said what is your other name and I
said, Tiger and he said, that is you Tiger. He said, someone will come
for you, just stay there. And then he left me.

	And then we went to an open space surrounded by the cells. While I was
still sitting there Mabilo came and he called me. He said are you Tiger?
I said, yes I am Tiger. He started giving me two slaps on my face. I said
to him, why do you have to slap me? He said, you guys give people orders
to burn other peoples' houses.

	After 30 minutes Strydom came in, not the Strydom I work with but the
Strydom from the police department. He asked me who I was and I said
Edward and he said your other name? I said Tiger. Hearing that I was
Tiger, he got furious. He said I thought that Tiger was a very hefty
person but I am shocked to see that you are so mean. He started hitting
me with fists. He started slapping me. He kicked me and then he hit my
head against the wall. He said you burnt Tobias's house. I said to him
no, I don't know Tobias. I don't go to other peoples houses. He said we
have been told that you burnt Tobias's house. I said to



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	7	E RAMORWAGADI

him, bring the people who told you that and I will tell them the truth.

	I said to him why don't you just lay a charge against me and take me to
court. He said we are going to handle you today seeing that you are
terrorists. He put me underneath the table and said I should squat. I
squatted under the table for about an hour.

	There were two white policewomen with heavy thighs. I was just looking
at their thighs, you know, while I was underneath the table. I spent an
hour just looking at this

picture. They were listening to the news on the radio about the violent
areas in the country. And they continually spoke to each other, saying
listen to what they are saying. They said to me, can you hear what they
are saying? And I said, yes.

	After an hour they said I should wait outside. After five minutes
Strydom came again. The two Strydoms came back. These people were so
heavily built and I said to myself, o God I am dying today. And while I
am still sitting there I planned.

	Two men came before them and they said, Tiger are you here? They said
you told them that I have got a Freedom Charter. Why don't they tell me
like that? And they said to me burnt Tobias's house. They never said that
to me, because by that time they were not allowing the Freedom Charter.
Thereafter they left me there and I planned on what to do.

	Strydom told me that here are you two colleagues, who are coming to deal
with you. And then they left and said they would come back. They stood
next to the office and they were conversing.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	8	E RAMORWAGADI

	I went away at that time. I ran into the direction of the gate. When I
were there I stood looking and I saw a Security guard and the cars were
also leaving the place. I was also with the two guys they said I had
given the Freedom Charters to. I had a pint of milk and half a loaf of
bread. I was eating it along my way, because I was afraid that people
would kidnap me.

	These other security opened the gate and then I walked out of the gate.
I walked alone. When I turned at the police station, I closed my eyes and
ran away. I was running very fast by that time and I went past the
soldiers' camp. I also went over the Kimberley Road and then went to the
UDf offices. There I met Chris Naidoo who came for this case.

DR RANDERA: I wander if you will please tell us now about the time that
you were working for GAWU and what happened during that time.

MR RAMORWAGADI: Whilst I was working in General Allied Workers Union this
company met with other unions, because it was liquidated at that time. I
volunteered to work in Saru which was another union, which met together
with Gawu. While I volunteered the other security branch offices, that
was in 1987, after we were released under the State of Emergency.

	In 1987 the Security Branch came to me and said, they hear that I have
been sending membership cards from Saru and I am also an organizer for
the workers so that they could join the union. I told them I don't know
anything about that. I haven't received any cards from Saru and also not
received their forms. But it was true I had received such documents. They
took me to the police station.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	9	E RAMORWAGADI

	At the police station they told me that Mandela will never be released
from prison and also that Mbeki they will also not leave jail. They are
also the same as you. I heard you were influencing the workers so they
can strike. I told them, no I am not doing that. When I refused that I
was not doing that they started assaulting me.

	They used to bang my head against the wall and kick me. Whilst they were
doing that Le Roux entered and he told me that, you influence the workers
to strike. Do you know that is communist activities? I told them there is
nothing Christian you could find from someone who was looking for
independence.

	Thereafter, I stayed for about nine months without being able to eat. I
was only eating soft diet.

DR RANDERA: As I said, you have given us a very long and detail
statement. I just want to ask you a few questions.

	Like so many young people from Huhudi, we have heard repeatedly over the
last two days how you were picked up, put in jail, hit, even electric
shock treatment. And that has been the story of so many young people that
have come to the Commission over the last two and a half days. But at the
same time I want to take us back to that period, it is a period of
intense activity in Huhudi.

	You have the Huhudi Youth Organization on the one side, the UDF on the
other side. There is also the attack, and in your own statement you say
at one stage you were questioned about the bombing of one of the Mayor's
homes. And the Mayor's wife was injured. You also say in your statement
that the Huhudi Youth Organization was a non-violent organization.

	I just want us to get a perspective on this. Remember MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	10	E RAMORWAGADI

that we are not in a court of law here.

	Yesterday when asked Mayor Galeng said that he was

responsible for taking ANC or young people across the border and back
into the country as well. He saw that as part of the struggle.

	Now when I look at your statement it seemed like you were arrested for
standing up against the tricameral system, you were arrested for giving
out leaflets or documents and the Freedom Charter, you were arrested for
being against the increase in rents, but can we really get an idea from
you about yourself and what happened in the area, what the activity in
terms of what the activities really was from you people. Were people
really involved, were young people really involved in attacking the homes
of Councillors, were young people involved in attacking policemen in that
area?

MR RAMORWAGADI: We as the leaders of the youth organization, we usually
encouraged the youth not to use violence. Among the youth there were
those who were interested in reading, in studying, those who knew that
apartheid is a crime and they knew that the whole world was against
apartheid. And they knew that apartheid had to be fought in different
ways to be brought down.

	People felt they were oppressed. They were supposed to use anything at
their disposal to destroy the apartheid government. Some of the youth
have told themselves that they will do anything possible to destroy this
government that was hated by most people.

DR RANDERA: But that included, I am sure you would agree, attacking
Councillors, burning down houses, if the houses

belonged to Councillors, perhaps throwing bombs at these houses as well.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	11	E RAMORWAGADI

MR RAMORWAGADI: Yes, that happened, but I am not saying that it was done
by the youth. I will only testify that I was not a witness, I did not see
that happening with my own eyes.

DR RANDERA: But it happened Edward.

MR RAMORWAGADI: What happened?

DR RANDERA: What you have just said. You may not have been a witness, but
it happened. Huhudi is not an area that is spreads over miles and miles.
It is a very small area, so everybody knew what was happening in Huhudi.

MR RAMORWAGADI: Yes, that happened, Councillors' houses were burnt, the
police were ... actually the police were fighting the people, the people
did not fight the police. Now they were actually protecting themselves
against the police.

DR RANDERA: Thank you.

MS SEROKE: Edward, you said your manager had a gun in his hand when he
picked you up.

MR RAMORWAGADI: According to the rumours I knew him as a reservist.

MS SEROKE: While you were taken to the brewery you saw along the road
that you were not taken to the brewer, you were going to the police
station. Did you ask him where he was taking you to?

MR RAMORWAGADI: Yes, I asked him and the bar was also the way that went
to the brewery. Along this road there is another road that goes to town
and the other one is the one to the brewery. Even if you are in town you
can find the way to the brewery.

MS SEROKE: You said again, the other Strydom who was a security, he also
punched you until you bled. Did you stop MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	12	E RAMORWAGADI

the blood that was flowing from you?

MR RAMORWAGADI: Yes I did that.

MS SEROKE: We heard the programmes we've been through when you tried to
bring peace in Huhudi. And it is quite clear in what you did achieve
probably what you wanted to achieve. We saw what the activities of the
youth were and we want to tell you that all he experiences that you went
through we'll try to help you.

	We thank you and your family and we say to you we will try and find help
for you Thank you.

	----------------------

