
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	7 MAY 1997		

NAME:	ALETTA K RAMOSEPELE

CASE:		JB3611	

HELD AT: 	RUSTENBURG

DAY:		2

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Ramosepele, we ask Aletta Ramosepele. Aletta, can you
hear well?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes, I can.

CHAIRPERSON: I would like you to stand up.

DR ALLY: Will you please raise your right hand.

ALETTA RAMOSEPELE: (Duly sworn in, states).

DR ALLY: The witness is sworn in, thank you.

DR RANDERA: Dr Randera will ask you some questions now.

DR RANDERA: Aletta, good afternoon. We hope you are well. Aletta, you are
also from Phokeng. You have told us that you are a housekeeper and you
have come to talk about your husband, Samuel Molemane Ramosepele. You are
taking us to 1992, after an ANC meeting which was held at the Roman
Catholic St Joseph's Church, I presume and the arrest of your husband.
Can you tell us what happened after that?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: He came home at night at about eleven o'clock. When he
got home, I asked him where do you come from at this time. He told me
that I had been arrested Phokeng earlier. I was arrested by the police of
the former Boputhatswana government, because he had a T-shirt with
Kotsilibone's picture on him and he was home from a meeting. And he told
me that the people who arrested him, were in a private vehicle. After
this vehicle spotted him, the small car reversed and parked near him,
where they put him in the car and took him to the police station.

	At the police station they put him in another room and they pointed at
him with a gun and they said this is your mother. They hit him with the
gun butt and he was swollen on his face. He even had a wound. And then he
went to a doctor and the doctor certified that he had been beaten on his
heart, because thereafter he used to fall down, even at work.

	One day when I came back from work, I found him laying dead. Sometimes
he would be taken to the doctor during the afternoon whilst I was still
not at home. And that day when I came back from work, I found him lying
dead. I arranged for a funeral.

DR RANDERA: Aletta, is there anything else you want to add before I ask
you some questions?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: No, there is nothing I would want to say further.

DR RANDERA: Then I would like to ask some questions. Aletta, how old was
your husband when he passed away?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: He was 51 years old when he died.

DR RANDERA: And was he working before his arrest and assault?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes, he was a builder before he got arrested.

DR RANDERA: Now, the meeting took place in 1992, but your husband died in
1993.

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes, he had a heart disease, because of the injuries he
sustained when he was being beaten up. Because beforehand he was a very
healthy person. Thereafter he was not even able to climb up the ladder,
because he was afraid, because of his illness of falling down, he would
fall down from high buildings. Then he started taking up gardening and
started planting things in the garden which he sold later. And one day
while he was still working in his garden, he fell down and died.

DR RANDERA: So he had no heart problem before his arrest?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: No, none at all. He was a very healthy man, a very tough
man.

DR RANDERA: Did you ever lay a charge against the police?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: He went to the police because he was still alive by then.

DR RANDERA: And did he make a charge? Did he charge the police for the
arrest and beatings sustained?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: I am not sure, because they referred him to lawyers and
after his death I did not know what to do and I destroyed all the
documents that he had with him before, because I did not think one day I
would be sitting here, relating his story.

DR RANDERA: And after his death was there an inquest?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: No, there was no inquest, because I never thought that
there would be some people who would follow up on what happened to him.

DR RANDERA: Your husband was a member of the ANC is that right?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes.

DR RANDERA: And before that, was he a member of the Progressive People's
Party as well?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes, he was also a member.

DR RANDERA: Now, you say the only reason he was arrested was because he
had a T-shirt on that had Chief Lebone's picture on it?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes Sir.

DR RANDERA: Do you know what the meeting was all about, that your husband
had attended that day?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: No I am not sure because I was not present at that
meeting.

DR RANDERA: My last question, Aletta, do you have, how many children do
you have?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: I have one child.

DR RANDERA: I have no further questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Piet Meiring.

PROF MEIRING: I would just like to add to the last question. Your son
must be twenty four years of age. Is that correct? Elvis.

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes that is correct.

PROF MEIRING: What standard did he achieve at school?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: He is now doing a teacher's course at Potchefstroom.

PROF MEIRING: So he wants to become a teacher?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes.

PROF MEIRING: Do you have to support him, or can he support himself at
the moment?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes I am struggling to support him.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you so much.

DR ALLY: When your husband came, returned after having been arrested and
assaulted, he went to see a doctor, you say?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes, he used to go some doctors frequently.

DR ALLY: Do you have any way of trying to assist us to find out who these
doctors are or where they were based, because in your statement you just
mention them?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: One of these doctors is Mafowala.

DR ALLY: Who is based ...(intervention)

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Rustenburg.

DR ALLY: He is in Rustenburg. And your husband went to go and see him as
well. So he would have ...(intervention)

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes he used to go to this doctor.

DR ALLY: So he would have medical records of your husband?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: No, I did not keep those records. I thought it was over
with the case and then I destroyed them.

DR ALLY: No, not you, the doctor, the one doctor in Rustenburg would he
have medical records?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes, I want to believe the doctor still have the records.

DR ALLY: Would you be able to try and get those records for us, or would
you have difficulties?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: I think it would be difficult because I am working. I am
only having a day off today and tomorrow.

DR ALLY: If you could leave with Zodwa who is next to you, some, this
doctor's name and possibly the address maybe we can try and follow this
up if this is difficult for you.

	Now you say that the doctor spoke about internal bleeding as a result of
the beatings, was you husband ever hospitalised when he came out? Was he
sent to hospital?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: No, he was never hospitalised. He used to get treatment
and get back home.

DR ALLY: And was he going regularly for treatment, once a week, once
every month. Can you remember?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: He used to go once a week.

DR ALLY: And he was on medication?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes, they used to give him some pills.

DR ALLY: Your husband, he stopped working, you say. Was that the advice
of the doctor, or was it because he just felt that he couldn't anymore
because of these dizzy spells, or was he advised for medical reasons to
stop working?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: He was told by the doctor.

DR ALLY: This doctor in Rustenburg?

MRS RAMOSEPELE: Yes that is the doctor in Rustenburg. There was also
another doctor here in Phokeng who was a Tswana.

DR ALLY: Thank you very much for that. If you can try and leave Zodwa
with as much information as possible for us then we can try and follow
this up. Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Aletta for coming. We know that you work. You have
asked for a day off so that you can come and present your story to us.
Please try by all means to get those papers or records from the doctor so
that we, on the other hand, could try and help you. We thank you.

MRS RAMOSEPELE: I also thank you.

	_______________________________



