
	1	N RAWANA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 28.8.96 NAME: NOKUZOLA SYLVIA RAWANA

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: The next witness will be Nokuzola Sylvia Rawana. We would
now like to hand you over to Rev Xundu who will facilitate your evidence
on behalf of this Commission.

NOKUZOLA SYLVIA RAWANA: (sworn states)

REV XUNDU: Ms Rawana, you live here at Kwanobuhle, is that correct?

MS RAWANA: Yes.

REV XUNDU: And your brother, Mongameli Rawana, how did he get involved in
this problem that let to his death?

MS RAWANA: On the night of his death, my brother arrived at our house, we
were always together because our oldest sister got married, and I was
left with him, and we used to like to go to my sister at no.4 Sagumba
Street and we were always there and that night he arrived saying that he
was hungry and I asked him to wait a bit, that I was going to prepare
supper. This was before 9 o'clock in the evening and we thought that he
had gone to watch the news and we went next door to watch the news and we
got there halfway through the news and the news ended while we were there
and we went back home. When we got back home, the children were there by
themselves. I asked them where there uncle was, and they said that he had
left and that they didn't know where he was.

REV XUNDU: Let me just help you there, you say that

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	N RAWANA

Mongameli was met with this incident after Mr Kinikini had been burnt?

MS RAWANA: Yes, that same day.

REV XUNDU: Who was Mr Kinikini?

MS RAWANA: He was a councillor there at Kwanobuhle. He was a councillor
and also somebody who was in the burial society.

REV XUNDU: So, it was somebody popular there?

MS RAWANA: Yes.

REV XUNDU: On the day of Mr Kinikini's burning, when you went to go and
watch elevision, your son also said that at about 10 o'clock he heard
gunshots?

MS RAWANA: When we came back from watching the news, we waited, thinking
that he was going to come back, seeing that he had left, and we waited
until we have up until and at approximately 10 o'clock, while waiting, we
heard gunshots outside. During that time you couldn't have your lights on
late. When the hippos went past you had to blow out your lamps and it had
to be dark, even if you were awake. We went to sleep without him coming
back to have supper.

REV XUNDU: To which organisation did Mongameli belong?

MS RAWANA: At the time, he was following the UDF, he was a supporter of
the UDF.

REV XUNDU: You say that your neighbour, Mr Noankile Mgwegwe, what did he
say to you?

MS RAWANA: We had been looking for him for a long time and had already
given up when this lady said that the police had arrived at her house
early that day, two policemen with some Black policemen had arrived that
morning and asked her about the Rawana family and she said to them that
she knows the family. They said to her that she should please go to their
UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	N RAWANA

offices there in Church Street the following day and look for the riot
squad detectives. She did not do that because she said that she was
afraid not knowing what she was going to do when she got there.

	When she told us, she said that she realised afterwards that she should
try and get a message to us informing us about this. She told us this
after a long time.

	When I asked her what the police wanted, she said that they had a
photograph.

REV XUNDU: Who did she say these police were?

MS RAWANA: She said that they were two White policemen with some Black
policemen, and she said to me that she knows these policemen, she could
identify them if she were to see them again, but she wouldn't be able to
identify the Black ones.

REV XUNDU: And when you realised that your brother was no longer alive,
you went to look for him?

MS RAWANA: We looked and when we heard that he had been shot, we heard
from this woman saying that the police had arrived at her house and said
that, when we went to this office, we went and asked and these policemen
couldn't give us any information and one of them said that we should
fetch this lady at her house, so we went to fetch her and we went back
and got into those offices. She saw this White policemen and she
identified him and he also came to us and asked us if he could be of
assistance and I said yes, and I don't know if he recognised this lady
because he said, are you here for the case of Auston Rawana and I said
yes, and he said follow me and we went into his office and took a seat.

	He then asked what are you to the deceased. I then

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	N RAWANA

said that he was my brother and he said, are you his sister, and I said
yes, he said to me, would you be able to identify him if you were to see
him. I said yes. There were plenty of files on the table, and he took out
a file and gave it to me and asked me who is this. I looked at the
photograph and found that it was him and I said to him that this was my
brother. He asked me how do you know, and I said, no, I know him, these
are even the clothes he had on the day he disappeared from home.

REV XUNDU: When he showed you this photograph, did he say where the body
was?

MS RAWANA: He said that they had buried him.

REV XUNDU: How long had it been after you had lost him?

MS RAWANA: It was months later. He had been shot in March and I think
this was in about July, and he said to me that they had buried him.

REV XUNDU: You say that the police said that they had shot him. Who shot
him?

MS RAWANA: It was this White policeman, I don't know who he is.

REV XUNDU: Did he agree that he had shot him?

MS RAWANA: He said, yes, we shot him there at Nobuhle.

REV XUNDU: When he said this to you, who were you with at the time?

MS RAWANA: It was myself and this Anti Noankile. I don't know if she
still remembers him because she lives in the location.

	Thereafter, he said that we shot him at Nobuhle but that I shouldn't ask
him any questions. I then kept quiet because I was expecting him to tell
us what he had done thereafter, and he said that they inquired about him
but

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	5	N RAWANA

that nobody knew about him and then they buried him.

REV XUNDU: What did the people at the Alexandra Funeral Undertakers say?
Who gave them authority to take the body?

MS RAWANA: They said that they buried him and when I left there, I went
and informed my sister and the following day, we went to the office
wanting to know where they had buried him and where his clothes were.

REV XUNDU: Did you people approach you attorneys about this matter?

MS RAWANA: They did not give us any information.

REV XUNDU: Did you then go to your attorneys in connection with this
matter?

MS RAWANA: We went to the Black Sash. These people at the Alexandra
Burial Services said that they did not know who's body it was because it
had not been identified yet. When we went to the Black Sash, Vanesh came
out and said that they established that they had taken fingerprints and
sent them to Pretoria and when the fingerprints came back, after having
taken his fingerprints, they buried him, so that by the time the
fingerprints came back, he had already been buried in which ever way they
buried him. Up until now, we do not even know whether they really buried
him, we do not know where he is buried even if he is.

REV XUNDU: Now, after having told us all this, what is your request to
this Commission, what would you like this Commission to do for you?

MS RAWANA: I would like this Commission to investigate where he has been
buried, whether he has really been buried, whether he was really killed,
and whether he has really been buried, because it is possible that they
are going to say to us that they buried him, they killed him and buried
him, and UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	6	N RAWANA

I would like him to be found.

REV XUNDU: What else would you like?

MS RAWANA: Since is was only the two of us that were living together, he
was the one who was working, and I would like the Commission to support
me as well because he was the source of support and he used to support
myself and my children. Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Ms Rawana, we have taken notice of your requests,
we would like you to please take your seat.

-----------------------



