
	1	T RAWULA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 28.8.96 NAME: THEMBA FREDDY RAWULA

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you, Mr Rawula. We are now going to hand you over
to Dr Mapule Ramashala.

THEMBA FREDDIE RAWULA: (sworn states)

DR RAMASHALA: Mr Rawula, you are here to tell us about your son, Zukile
Rawula, am I correct?

MR RAWULA: Yes, that is correct.

DR RAMASHALA: That on the 28 May 1986, your son did not come back home?

MR RAWULA: Yes, it is like that.

DR RAMASHALA: Could you go back to that day, and briefly outline for us
what actually happened?

MR RAWULA: On that day, they left as usual to join other youth in the
area. We waited until late at night. There were three of them who took
other cousins. They came back and I asked them where he was, they said
that they had left him there, and I could here that there was toy toying
at Namashe, so I went to sleep, though I didn't sleep peacefully.

	In the morning, I woke up and went to work to Bisa, that is were I was
getting training and the following day, I was approached by Mr Gomomo
from Mabanhle in the company of other parents who informed that the
children were in Livingstone hospital and we went there. We found that
some of them later died but mine was still alive.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	T RAWULA

	Then I asked what had happened and he said that he had been shot on the
head and here on the penis, and he was there for three weeks and
discharged.

	After that, he started having fits, and he took treatment from Dr
Mazimba, who said that he could not be operated on because there was not
expert to do it.

DR RAMASHALA: Who was Mr Gomomo?

MR RAWULA: This was another comrade, living in Mabandla, because they
were the ones who ran away.

	After he was discharged from hospital, he was working for Mita, but he
was having fits. Then when I asked him what had actually happened, he
said they saw a group of people as they were patrolling, and these people
were toyi- toying and they just heard gunshots and one fell and the
others jumped and ran away.

	They thought these people were joking because they were dressed in the
uniform of the South African Defence Force.

DR RAMASHALA: Have you ever witnesses one of these fits. If so, what
actually happened?

MR RAWULA: Yes, they would call me. I would see him lying there with some
froth in his mouth and then I would take him by car, sometimes he would
even have this fit in my presence.

DR RAMASHALA: What actually happened? Was his body going rigid and
shaking when he was having these fits?

MR RAWULA: He would fall and jerk, whenever he would have an attack.

	After that, he worked for Mita, and I was working for Burnt Craft. Then
one day, when I was at work, I went back home, and there was a police van
that came and they informed me that my son was in a mortuary in Port
Elizabeth, and then UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	T RAWULA

I asked them why. They said that he had been shot and they had taken one
right eye out and they had slit him here on the neck and this is what I
observed as well. When I went there, he had died, but I didn't actually
see the wound, but I could the that there was a bullet wound.

	He was shot when he was on his way to Gawlayo to my brother. He says
that they came and then left and thereafter there was news that he was in
one forest.

DR RAMASHALA: ...(inaudible) 5 December 1987?

MR RAWULA: Yes, it would seem.

DR RAMASHALA: During the funeral, were there policemen there and were
family harassed by the police?

MR RAWULA: Yes, policemen used to come, mainly this Ama-Chaka. They would
harass us and they gave an order that we should not conduct the funeral
there, we should conduct the funeral somewhere else. Then I resisted, I
said that my son was a comrade. So as a result after all this, we had to
conduct the funeral after three weeks. Just at the beginning of the forth
week. These policemen did not actually beat him. They wanted to escort us
to the cemetery but I refused, and Mr Gomomo came to me and I told him,
and then he said that no, he was not going to get any escorters as a
comrade.

	One who had killed was a member of the Ama-Afrika because there was one
that was picked up with him, and he was buried on the same day. They took
out knives and they went up and down the cemetery and I was in the car so
that I should not get injured, so it was very difficult during that time
of the funeral because these Ama-Afrika were patrolling, even in the
cemetery.

DR RAMASHALA: Mr Rawula, we are asking you to relive a very UITENHAGE
HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	4	T RAWULA

painful part of your life, with the hope that talking about it would also
help make you feel better. How have you been able to cope with this for
all of this time?

MR RAWULA: I suffer because of the tragic way that he died, because his
throat was cut, his eye was taken out, like an animal and he had been
working for me for 20 years. This was really painful and one of the
policemen in Port Elizabeth said that this person had been killed in a
certain car, pointing at a certain car, and this really hurt me.

DR RAMASHALA: Mr Rawula, are you married?

MR RAWULA: I was married and then my wife died, but I have a second wife
now.

DR RAMASHALA: What would you like to request for the Commission?

MR RAWULA: I don't know, the Truth Commission will see because I had my
son, who was my only son, so the truth Commission will see, and I will
accept whatever they have to offer.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you Mr Rawula, you can go back to your seat.

	--------------------------

