
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:24-09-1996		NAME:WELE RUBUSHE

CASE: DUNCAN VILLAGE

DAY 2



REVD FINCA:	We have you here in this hearing. I must also thank you for
the way you handled us yesterday.

	And even your resounding attendance and your respect that you awarded to
us because - and you showed that you see the seriousness of this work
whereby we have to listen to the painful things that happened to the
people during the times of repression.

	Once more these witnesses here in front of us are going to give their
evidence to this Commission and we hope that you are once more going to
show the respect to them as they come forward.

	I will also like to extend and convey a message from Archbishop Reverend
Desmond Tutu, who is the Chairman of this Commission. He has said that
due to his involvement somewhere, he is unable to be present here with
us, but he would like to say to all of you especially to the witnesses,
his greetings and he cares so much about whatever you have to say to this
Commission.

	Let me once more introduce to you this panel of my colleagues who work
with me in this hearing in Duncan Village and we are a part of the main
Commission though we are based here in the Eastern Cape.

	Firstly I would like to introduce to you on my extreme left, Adv Sandi
who has taken a long time working and learning a lot about the Human
Right issues and he even had

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2

to go to Universities abroad and therefor his name came up as one of the
people to form this Commission. He hails from Grahamstown and he helps
people who want to get assistance whenever they have some serious cases.
Thank you.

	Next to me here the lady seated next to me is June Crichton. She comes
from work as an activist for Human Rights issues as a member of BLACK
SASH and also as an active member of the Anglican Church. There was a
time when she was away from our region because of ill health, she has
recently returned to rejoin the work of our region. We are delighted to
have her, she comes from Port Elizabeth, June Crichton.

	Next to me we have a lady - with her experience by the name of Tiny Maya
who hails from Umtata and who has been working for the Black Lawyers'
Association during the time of oppression. At the time they were this law
that has made it possible that there should be this Commission. Dulah
Omar sent out some lawyer's to the overseas countries to go and observe
what happens during the transitional period, so Mr Maya was one of those
people who was sent overseas to go and observe and get some more
information in preparation for this.

	Next to Ms Maya we've got a young man there who is - comes from Port
Elizabeth. As you can see he is quite young, and he is Revd Xundu, who is
one who has had great contribution during our struggle in this country.
And his leadership is well known in the country. He has worked for a long
time in Transkei during the Mtanzima regime, being arrested and locked in
and I would have to take care of his family during his absence. He again
moved on to Lamontville in Natal such that he narrowly escaped death, but
he is

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			

presently based in Port Elizabeth - one of the most outstanding leaders
of our people through the time of struggle. He is a member of the
Reparation and Rehabilitation Committee, thank you.

	So I happen to be the head of all these distinguished people which has
made it possible for this region to progress because these are stable
people and people who are rooted in this community.

	We are then going to start with our work on this last day here in Duncan
Village by listening to and focusing on the massacre that occurred on the
three days from the 10th to the 12th of August in 1985, which erupted
from the funeral of Griffiths, of Ms Victoria Mxenge's funeral.

	With intention that we are going to be through with that and after
lunch, we shall therefor listen to cases of Human Rights Violation, with
intention to finish up by four o'clock. We shall now hand over to Tiny
Maya.

MR SANDI:	Just before Tiny Maya tells us the order, maybe there is no
need to introduce to you, but I think it is important, this is Revd Finca
from the Chairman of the Board of Council, here in this area.

	He is President at (indistinct) and he is one Reverend who at the time
of (indistinct) fall, he was asked to take his place, so because he has
been in leadership for quite some time and this makes us to feel good and
relaxed so I would like to say in his own right, he is a fully fledged
leader that is quite distinguished and he is here in this Commission
rightfully, especially at this time so let us greet him. Thank you.

MS MAYA:	Chairperson, Commissioner I present to you the names of the
people who made some requests to come and make

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			

an appearance before this Commission. Even today a lot of these people
who are going to appear are the people who were ill-treated at the time
of the conflict and at the time when most people were being killed.

	So, I am not going to mention the time when these things happened. So we
have Zolile Gaza for attempted murder, Wele Rubushe for attempted murder,
Nomasonto Kumalo for attempted murder, Vuyelwa Kumalo who died,
Nomakhosazana Kumalo, who died, Mzwamadoda Sukwana for torture, Sakhile
Macwashe for attempted murder, Griffiths Fivana for attempted murder,
Nomfundo Daisy Dodo on behalf of Mteteleli Dodo, attempted murder,
Mxolisi Tototo Mbewana for attempted murder, Funeka Voyiya for attempted
murder, Rogers Gqeme for attempted murder, Nothemba Marjorie on behalf of
Mzwanele Fazzie who was murdered in 1982 and Sicelo Fazzie who was
murdered in 1984.

	We have got Nomonde Cynthia Mahlanza on behalf of Mkhululi Mahlanza who
was murdered. We have got Mzwakhe Mvubu for attempted murder, Michael
Makeke for attempted murder, Maki Ntshunde for severe ill-treatment,
Noretse Joyce Wili on behalf of Goodboy Wili, who was murdered.

	Elizabeth Kopi on behalf of Ntobeko Kopi who was murdered. Nomathemba
Grey, for Fundusile Grey who was murdered.

	Pinana Mazaka for Mike Mazaka who was murdered. That is the lot,
Chairperson, I thank you.

REVD FINCA:	We thank Ms Maya. For the sake of those who are doing some
recording I would like to make you aware that we have an additional
witness, Zogogalela Christopher Majuba as additional victims.

	Usually when we are going to talk about people who are

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5

no more and who died during this conflict, we normally remember them in
the way that is appropriate by standing up and then we mention their
names. Could you all rise?

	This is in memory of Vuyelwa Kumalo, Nomakhosazana Kumalo. We remember
Mzwanele Fazzie, Sicelo Fazzie. We remember Mkhululi Maklanza.

	Goodboy Wili, Ntobeko Kopi, Fundusile Grey. We remember Mike Mazaka.
Make them rest in peace, Oh Lord and give them eternal life, thank you.

	Is Zolile Gaza in? No, not yet? We are now going to ask Wele Rubushe to
ascend the stage together with Mzwamadoda Sukwana.

REVD XUNDU:	Wele, can you please rise.

WELE RUBUSHE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Mzwamadoda?

MZWAMADODA DE VILLIERS SUKWANA:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you very much, they are sworn in.

REVD FINCA:	We welcome you in this Commission. We are going to hand over
to Mr Sandi, who is going to question you on behalf of the Commission. We
are going to start with Mr Rubushe.

MR SANDI:	Thank you very much, Chairperson. Let me greet you Mr Rubushe,
this morning. How are you?

W RUBUSHE:	I am fine.

MR SANDI:	Let me confirm first, your names, your full names, you are Wele
Rubushe, is that so?

W RUBUSHE:	Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI:	You reside here at Duncan Village, is that so?

W RUBUSHE:	Yes, that's correct.

MR SANDI:	Today by being here in front of the Commission, you are going
to tell about something that happened to you

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			W RUBUSHE

in August 1985 when it was early int he morning. You were shot, is that
so?

W RUBUSHE:	Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI:	I am going to hand over to you so that you can tell us in
details how did this happened. What happened on that particular day.

W RUBUSHE:	In 1985, it was early in the morning, I remember it was on a
Tuesday, I was coming from the toilet. When I was nearer to the house, I
saw a hippo, a casper which was at a distance.

	When I was still looking at this hippo one White man alighted from the
police casper. While I was still looking at this, I fell. I felt a
bullet, when I tried to stand up, I couldn't.

	I lost my consciousness. I regained my consciousness at the hospital, I
think it was at (indistinct) day. After that I remained in hospital, I
think I was in the hospital for three months.

	When I was discharged from the hospital I was taking a treatment until
1986. At least the pain was no longer as serious but at some stage I
could still feel the pain - though I can't remember the years.

	But even here, last year I was admitted again in the hospital. It was
something like two weeks, it was concerning my operations.

MR SANDI:	Do you still remember the name of the Doctor who was examining
you in hospital?

W RUBUSHE:	That Doctor, I can't remember, I think it is something like
Barnard, I'm not sure.

MR SANDI:	But Mr Rubushe, you said you went to Lloyd police station to
place a claim concerning a shooting. Can you

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			W RUBUSHE

tell us Mr Rubushe, what happened at Lloyd police station?

W RUBUSHE:	When I went there, they asked me a question who shot me, I
said it is soldiers. They asked me the name of the soldier, I told them
that I don't know the name of the soldier. They said they won't take the
case because I don't know the name of the person.

MR SANDI:	If I hear you clearly, you said you were not - just because of
the fact that you did not know the name of the soldier who shot you, no
attention was paid to you claim? Was there anything that, maybe you, did
you ever approach any lawyer?

W RUBUSHE:	No, I didn't.

MR SANDI:	Were there any people who saw you when you were shot, when you
were being shot?

W RUBUSHE:	Yes, I can say because there are people who took me and one of
my neighbours once told me the story.

MR SANDI:	What did he say?

W RUBUSHE:	He said he saw me while I was being shot by the soldiers.

MR SANDI:	At the police station, do you still remember the name of the
police that you were going to who said he is not going to attend to this
case of yours, because you don't know the name of the soldier?

W RUBUSHE:	No, I don't remember.

MR SANDI:	Did you ever go to the police station again or maybe you didn't
go there after that?

W RUBUSHE:	Yes, I tried to go to Fleet Street, I tried to institute
another claim again. Even there, I was not attended to, just because I
didn't know the name of the person who shot me.

MR SANDI:	Did you go to Fifth Street police station on the

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8			W RUBUSHE

very same day?

W RUBUSHE:	No, I didn't, I think after a few weeks I went there.

MR SANDI:	Whom did you approach at Fleet Street police station?

W RUBUSHE:	It was a White man.

MR SANDI:	What did he say as a response?

W RUBUSHE:	He also asked the very same question that who shot me.

MR SANDI:	By the time you were there, were there any other people who
used to go to the police station concerning the very same problems just
because they don't know the name of the police and they were not attended
to?

W RUBUSHE:	I don't know, I won't say, but to me that's what I was told.

MR SANDI:	Mr Rubushe, can you go on with your evidence? Is there anything
else that you would like to say, anything else that you would like to add?

W RUBUSHE:	The other thing that I would like to add is this, although I
was shot by this person whom that I don't even know, at least something
must be done to try and find a reason for this to find this person who
shot at me.

MR SANDI:	As far as you know, what do you think that might be the reason,
what do you think that might be the reason?

W RUBUSHE:	No, I don't know anything.

MR SANDI:	Are there any incidents that took place in that particular
place where you were shot at, maybe a conflict between the soldiers and
the residents?

W RUBUSHE:	No, there was nothing in that place, nothing happened.

MR SANDI:	In conclusion Mr Rubushe, what are your requests

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9			W RUBUSHE

in this Commission?

W RUBUSHE:	The request that I have today is that I wish that the
Commission should investigate the people who shot me at that day.

MR SANDI:	Nothing else that you said in your statement Mr Rubushe?

W RUBUSHE:	Can you repeat that again?

MR SANDI:	Is that all, is that your only request Mr Rubushe the
investigation about the person who shot you, is there anything else?

W RUBUSHE:	Yes, there is another request that I had. MR SANDI:	Can you
tell us about that?

W RUBUSHE:	I just discovered that my condition needs some, I must go and
get some disability grant.

MR SANDI:	When was that? Did you happen to get that grant?

W RUBUSHE:	I think it was in 1993, 1994.

MR SANDI:	Are you employed now, or what are you doing now?

W RUBUSHE:	I'm not working.

MR SANDI:	Is that all that you would like to say concerning your evidence
just before I hand over?

W RUBUSHE:	After I was granted this money I have children who are still
at school and I am responsible for everything and I had to go again to
ask for something else because my wife also, I had to get another one,
because my wife also, must also take care of the children.

MR SANDI:	Thank you very much, I'll hand over to the Chairperson, thank
you.

REVD FINCA:	Revd Xundu?

REVD XUNDU:	While you got this accident, were you working?

W RUBUSHE:	No, I was unemployed.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	10			W RUBUSHE

REVD XUNDU:	How many children do you have? How many children do you have?

W RUBUSHE:	I have six children.

REVD XUNDU:	What standards are they doing?

W RUBUSHE:	The first one is doing standard 7, the other two are doing
standard 4. The other one is doing standard 7, the two is doing standard
4. And the other one is doing standard 2.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Mr Chairperson.

W RUBUSHE:	There is something else that I forgot to say but I think it is
written in my statement. I have a problem concerning my operations.
Sometimes, especially in Winter I suffer a lot they are very painful. I
visit the day hospital regularly and then I get some tablets.

	Especially the one on my leg sometimes it is very painful, that is the
reason why I was admitted at Frere Hospital.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you very much Mr Rubushe. Me are going to go to Mr
Sukwana now.

MR SANDI:	I greet you Mzwamadoda de Villiers Sukwana. Those are your full
names, is that so?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI:	Let me first confirm that you were born in 1969?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI:	You reside at C, Duncan Village, is that correct?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	What you are going to tell us about here today happened in
August 1985 here in Duncan Village?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI:	As from 1969, if I'm counting from 1969, I notice that you were
only 15 years old or 16, you were between 15

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	11			M DE V SUKWANA

and 16 years, is that correct?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that is correct.

MR SANDI:	Let me start by asking you this question. What are you doing
now, are you attending school?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No, I'm not a scholar.

MR SANDI:	Are you working here in East London?

M DE V SUKWANA:	I once worked in Gauteng.

MR SANDI:	Let's start on the day of the 15th of August 1985 as you said
in your statement. By the way you said on this particular day it was
after the houses were burnt and some other places here in Duncan Village,
is that so?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that's correct.

MR SANDI:	Can you tell us Mr Sukwana freely what happened on that
particular day?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes. On the 15th it was midnight, it was midnight, I
heard someone kicking the door. It was White men who were in the company
of Siphiwo Jamjam.

	When I tried to tell my mother that she must know that I'm being
arrested, the Whites took me to the hippo. They said I must lie there
because some of the comrades were already there.

	We left because these people had a list.

MR SANDI:	You say here in this hippo there were some other people who
were arrested?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, it is true.

MR SANDI:	Were those people young people or maybe people who were at an
age?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, there were older people and there were others who
were of my age.

MR SANDI:	You're saying the hippo was patrolling, they were looking for
people?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	12			M DE V SUKWANA

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, they didn't get the people, they took us to the
police station. When I was at the police station, they said I must take
off my clothes and they electrocuted my private parts with electric shots
and they hit my underneath my feet.

	After that they asked me about the organisations, political
organisations that I was involved in. I told them that I was a member of
ELYO. They locked me up in the cell and after that they took me to the
courts and from the court we were taken to Westbank.

	When we arrived at Westbank, the police ordered us to take off our
clothes. They were hitting us with batons.

MR SANDI:	Let's go back a little bit Mr Sukwana. At the police station,
do you still remember the policeman who were harassing you and torturing
you and assaulting you?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No, I can't remember, because they didn't have their name
tags on.

MR SANDI:	Let's talk about Westbank now.

M DE V SUKWANA:	Do you mean Fort Glamorgan now?

MR SANDI:	Yes, that's correct. What happened there?

M DE V SUKWANA:	When we arrived there, they ordered us to take off our
clothes. They were chasing us, assaulting us with batons. There was one
other policeman by the name of Nkunzemnyama who said we must salute Botha.

	He was hitting us. If there is no sort of echo, he'll say that he's not
counting that lash and then he'll start afresh hitting us again.

MR SANDI:	How long did this assaults take place?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Since we were there we were being assaulted every day.

MR SANDI:	You said you stayed there for 3 months?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	13			M DE V SUKWANA

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that's correct.

MR SANDI:	Do you mean that every day in this three months, you were being
assaulted and tortured?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, he used to wake us up early in the morning and drive
us like sheep, hitting us with batons, even if you come back, the same
thing would happen.

MR SANDI:	This person, this Nkunzemnyama, do you mean this man's name was
Nkunzemnyama?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that's the name that they were using. I don't know
his other name.

MR SANDI:	Did you ever hear anything about this?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	What is it that they were saying about this Nkunzemnyama?

M DE V SUKWANA:	I used to hear that he was mishandling, manhandling the
people.

MR SANDI:	Did you see Nkunzemnyama after that?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, I did after I was released from detention.

MR SANDI:	Is he still around?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No, I haven't seen him for a long time.

MR SANDI:	Is that all concerning your evidence Mr Sukwana?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, that's all.

MR SANDI:	Is there any wish that you have that you can tell this
Commission about? Is there any request that you would like to make in
this Commission today?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, I have a request that the Commission must try to
investigate the White men who came to my house and I would like to do
something about them.

MR SANDI:	Do you have any aim, do you have any intention? Is there
anything that you would like to do?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	14			M DE V SUKWANA

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, I would like to take them into my lawyers, because
they broke my teeth.

MR SANDI:	You say they broke your teeth.

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, they hit me with the rifle while I was trying to
call my mother.

MR SANDI:	Are there any teeth that you lost	during that time? How many of
them? Mr Sukwana, let me as this question, are there any injuries that
you sustained by being assaulted by the police?

MR DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, they hit me on my ribs, even now I don't feel good,
because sometimes it is painful. Some of - the other side of my ribs can
be painful.

MR SANDI:	Is there any treatment that you are getting from a Doctor,
maybe from a hospital?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No, I try to use some other kind of medicine from the
herbs.

MR SANDI:	Is it necessary to use those herbs if you are not well? Are you
still using those herbs even now?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No, I'm no longer using them.

MR SANDI:	Do you mean that those traditional treatment helped you?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, it did.

MR SANDI:	Is that all that you would like to say Mr Silwana?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Thank you very much Mr Silwana. Thank you Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Revd Xundu.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you still at school when you were arrested?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, I was still at school.

REVD XUNDU:	What standard were you doing?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	15			M DE V SUKWANA

M DE V SUKWANA:	I was doing standard 5.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you ever go back to school after that?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No, I didn't.

REVD XUNDU:	What was the reason for that? What is the reason for you not
to go back to school again?

M DE V SUKWANA:	There was no specific reason, I just decided not to go
back.

REVD XUNDU:	Would you like to go on with your education since education
will also help you in life to go on with your life?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, I would like to go on.

REVD XUNDU:	With what?

M DE V SUKWANA:	With my education.

REVD XUNDU:	What kind of education is that?

M DE V SUKWANA:	To go back to school.

REVD XUNDU:	To start doing standard 6?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Are you working now?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No, I'm not working, I was working in Gauteng, I was
working at a garage. After that, I didn't go back to work.

REVD XUNDU:	You didn't get any grant?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you try to make any application?

M DE V SUKWANA:	No.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Ntsikelelo Sandi.

MR SANDI:	Mr Silwana, are there any other people that you know that you
were together at Fort Glamorgan?

M DE V SUKWANA:	Yes, there are. One of them is Vusumzi Mzuvukile Mbengo
who was here yesterday and Mongia Zimanxa. DUNCAN VILLAGE
HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	16			M DE V SUKWANA

There is a lot of them, I won't be able to quote, to tell you all of them.

MR SANDI:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Rubushe and Mr Silwana. We thank you for this
testimony trying to reveal to us things that happened during the Duncan
Village massacre.

	But I would like to make a request to the people at large. There is this
name Nkunzemnyama, but we are not able to use this name, because it is
not the real name of a person. If ever there is somebody else here at
Duncan Village who has some knowledge of this Nkunzemnyama's real name,
we would like to get that - there's one there who's - who knows him. Can
you please see us during the break because the aim of this Commission is
to go to those people who did these things.

	Reconciliation is not going to be - we are not going to have
reconciliation not until we meet those people and for them to come
forward and they must also be here with the victims also.

	So this Nkunzemnyama's name is, we hear this Nkunzemnyama's name for the
forth time. We would like to know his real name to get his true identity
so that we can go to him.

	Thank you very much, you can go back to your places.

	--------------------

