
	1	M RWEQANA

TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 17.04.96			NAME: MXOLISI RWEQANA

CASE: EC0050/96 - EAST LONDON

DAY 3

__________________________________________________________

DR BORAINE: The hour is quite late, we've had a very exhausting day, but
we want to take one final witness who will be supported by an eye
witness, so I call to the witness stand Mxolisi Rweqana and Mzwoxolo
Matoto Nano.

	You are Mr Rweqana? Welcome. Thank you very much for coming and for
waiting so long. We are glad that we can see you today rather than
tomorrow, because otherwise you have to wait yet another anxious night.
Will you please stand?

MXOLISI RWEQANA: (sworn states)

MZWOXOLO MATOTONANO: (sworn states)

DR BORAINE: The stories that you are going to tell in many ways are very
discouraging because there are so many stories like this and yet every
story is so so important, and we want you to know that you are important
whether you start in the early morning or whether you are the final
witness in the day. You count and we would like you to take your time and
relax, and you will be led in the evidence by Mr Sandi and I hope you
will feel ready now to tell your story. Thank you.

MR SANDI: I'll start with you Mr Rweqana. I understand that you have
lodged a complaint on behalf of your brother Andile Rweqana.

MR RWEQANA: Yes it is so.

MR SANDI: Can you tell us what happened about him?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2	M RWEQANA

MR RWEQANA: Andile Rweqana was my younger brother. When I came here at
Pagamisa, I went to see them. I received a message through my sister
saying, Andile went away a day before because he was called by Madodana
and then he went to his house. Again she said Andile didn't come back but
there was also a message which was unconfirmed. It was said he people who
were also there in the house of Madodana were arrested and some of them
have been shot dead. This continued and the information was still
unconfirmed until Tuesday. The police came in on this Tuesday and they
came to say that we must go and identify the body.

	After the family members went there, they confirmed that it was indeed
Andile who had died. We tried to make preparations for the funeral. A few
days before it I was sent to Zwelitscha, one of the townships where I met
Pumele Lori. When I asked Pumele what happened and I wanted him to
confirm and state what had happened, because he was a policeman. He said
he was on leave but when he came back he learned about what had happened.

MR SANDI: Who is Pumele Lebani?

MR RWEQANA: It is Pumele Lelori. After a few days before the funeral,
there were people who came from the security forces. This person
identified himself as Zishruba, he was amongst the people who visited us.
He said he was sent by the police and the office to give orders about the
way in which the funeral arrangements should be carried out. I was
staying with Sisnama Tamsanga at the time. We asked Mr Zishruba who sent
them and then asked whose funeral they were giving orders for. They said
it is Andile's funeral and then we asked who it was that killed Andile?
They were shocked also and said, haven't we learned from the police or
EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3	M RWEQANA

the office that this child was dead and when we said no, they apologised,
because they didn't know that we were not aware of what had happened to
Andile.

	We were making preparations until the day of the funeral. In the morning
of one of those days there was a messenger who came to say the school
children and the people who were coming to the funeral had been turned
away by the police. These people were ordered not to attend the funeral.
The few people who were able to attend the funeral were the people who
arrived the day before. Even the day of the funeral there were a lot of
police.

	After the funeral, there was a continuous visit. There were always
motorcars opposite our neighbours and in front of the family house, we
didn't know what they were looking for. What happened is that we were
told that we were wanted at the offices and it was said that one of the
lawyers want us, and we were told that there are other people who are
handling our case. We didn't know where to go, we didn't even know who
the lawyer was and we never lodged any complaint. We spent a short period
and after that when we didn't respond we were called again, and then we
went to this lawyer. We asked him who gave him permission to continue
with the case because we didn't lodge any complaint. We requested that if
there is a file there, we wanted it to be submitted to us and then we
said we'll take it to our own lawyer.

	There was no progress in the case and we were able to write to the
Attorney General. At the time it was the Ciskeian Homeland. Jurgens said
there is nobody that he can prosecute about this happening.

MR SANDI: Without disturbing you, what was your brother

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4	M RWEQANA

doing, was he a teacher?

MR RWEQANA: Yes he was a teacher. He was a teacher at Ngqzulu.

MR SANDI: Is it his friend who is next to you on your right?

MR RWEQANA: I cannot say he is his friend.

MR SANDI: Are there any indications of what happened before you r brother
was shot?

MR RWEQANA:	Yes there things that happened. On the 15th of June they were
arrested, it was Andile and Mr Nano and a few others. It was alleged that
they were distributing pamphlets for June 15th/16th. All those people
were arrested, they never appeared in court, they were released on the
day of the 11th July and he died on the 17th, the same month.

MR SANDI: What did he say took place when he was arrested?

MR RWEQANA: We didn't have a lot of time to talk about what
happened...(end of tape 15)

(incomplete -------- next tape missing)



