SUBMISSION



SUBMISSION




IRO THE FORMER SADF












COMPILED BY


THE SANDF NODAL POINT















Presented by



Maj Gen B. Mortimer




===========================================================================


SA DEFENCE FORCE INVOLVEMENT


IN THE INTERNAL SECURITY


SITUATION


IN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA




INDEX




INTRODUCTION




PART 1



SUMMARY OF THE RSA'S NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY




PART 2



THE MANIFESTATION OF THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR IN SOUTH AFRICA FROM THE SADF
PERSPECTIVE




PART 3



ORGANISATION, AIM AND FUNCTIONS OF THE SA DEFENCE FORCE




PART 4



DEFENCE STRATEGY, PLANNING AND AUTHORISATION






PART 5



SA DEFENCE FORCE OPERATIONS




PART 6



CONCLUSION





.


===========================================================================

INTRODUCTION


1. Chairperson and Commissioners, by way of introduction, it is important
to state that the role of the South African National Defence Force
(SANDF) in today's submission to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
is, and has been purely that of a facilitator. We are in the unique
position that the SANDF as a Government Department and newly integrated
force, obviously cannot give any testimony on what took place during the
previous era. The former South African Defence Force (SADF) no longer
exists and therefore no person can officially speak on its behalf.

2. In order to assist the TRC to meet its responsibilities in accordance
with the Constitution, as well as with the Promotion of National Unity
and Reconciliation Act of 1995, the SANDF decided to establish a Nodal
Point to facilitate access to information needed for this purpose.

3. The submission I am about to make was compiled from available
documents from the previous era, as well as from inputs from ex-members
of the former SADF, through facilitation by the Nodal Point. No attempt
has been made to analyse or evaluate the information with the benefit of
hindsight. It may therefore not be a complete version of SADF actions, or
a correct reflection of all SADF members' point of view, but will attempt
to place in perspective the activities between 1960 and 1993. It may also
make it easier for individual members of the SADF to approach the TRC via
the Nodal Point with evidence which will contribute to the objectives of
your committee. The SANDF wishes to assure the TRC of its continued
support in this regard. The Nodal Point will be at the disposal of the
TRC to facilitate any questions that may arise from this submission or
any other issue. In this regard I would also like to draw your attention
to the existing agreement with the TRC.

SCOPE

4. Strategic Planning in the SADF was based on two main considerations.
Firstly the National Security Strategy and secondly the threat perception
against the country. For this reason it was decided to present the
submission as follows:

a. Summary of the RSA National Security Strategy.


b. The Revolutionary War in South Africa from the Perspective of the SADF.

c. The Organisation, Aim and Functions of the SADF.

d. The Defence Strategy, Planning and Authorisation.

e. Defence Force Operations.

f. "Conclusion".


===========================================================================

PART 1




SUMMARY OF THE RSA NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY


(1960 TO 1989)


INTRODUCTION

1. The RSA strategy as formulated in Boek 1/Beleid . Die RSA se Belange
en die RSA-Regering se doel, doelstellings, en beleid vir ordelike
Regering, asook Riglyne vir die uiteindelike Staatkundige bestel van
Suider Afrika (1980), was to improve the quality of life for all South
Africans. This strategy, which was approved by Cabinet on 4 March 1980,
further elaborated the national goals.

a. Political Goal. To ensure self-determination for all population groups
in South Africa.

b. Economic Goal. To strive for the optimal combination of economic and
social development

c. Social Goal. To further living standards based on religious and
cultural principles and equal opportunities for all population groups.

d. Security Goal. To ensure the security of South Africa against any
threats. In this regard the RSA's Strategy emphasised that the RSA had no
aggressive intentions towards its neighbours, but that the RSA's posture
was of an offensive nature and would, through pro-active actions, ensure
its national security.


2 The development of the RSA's National Security Strategy was directly
influenced by the ANC's strategy of revolutionary warfare and it was
expected of the RSA security forces to maintain law and order and create
a stable environment in which the RSA Government could bring about
evolutionary political change in the country.

THE RSA's NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

3. Mr P.W. Botha became Minister of Defence on 5 April 1966. Whereas his
predecessors had been primarily concerned about threats directed against
South Africa, Mr Botha's speeches were characterised by a broader vision
of security, encompassing the East-West global ideological conflict and
South Africa's role in it. Three themes predominated in his speeches:
firstly that the West was threatened by Soviet expansionism, secondly
that South Africa was part of the West and lastly, that South Africa
played a central part in the Soviet strategy of cutting Europe off from
South Africa's essential raw materials. In this regard he argued that the
Cape Sea Route was of vital importance to the West. Not all Western
countries shared his view on Soviet strategy and in December 1967 the
British government declined to sell maritime military equipment to South
Africa. This led to the establishment of ARMSCOR in 1968 with the aim "to
make the country self-sufficient in the field of defence."

4. The Minister of Defence defended his idea of an indirect war. In 1968,
he argued that "¼ in the world we live in, the dividing line between war
and peace is generally no longer a clear one, and the South African
Defence Force ..must take that situation into account". In 1970 Mr Botha
reiterated that "¼there (was) a global struggle between the forces of
communism on the one hand and the forces of stability, security and
progress on the other." He emphasized that the military and economic
fronts were but two of the ways in which that onslaught was waged. The
struggle for South Africa had to be seen in the same context. The Prime
Minister, Mr Vorster, added that the ultimate aim of the communist and
leftist powers was not Rhodesia and Mozambique, but what can be taken
from South African soil.

5. To counter "the Soviet expansionism" the SA government concluded
defensive arrangements with Portugal and Rhodesia. Units of the SA Police
were dispatched to Rhodesia in September 1967 : "¼to fight against men
who originally came from South Africa and were on their way back to
commit terrorism in South Africa." Of more practical importance was the
fact that these states (Angola, Mozambique and Rhodesia) formed an
effective buffer against direct foreign intervention by force. The
strategy was to keep the "defence line" as far as possible away from
South Africa itself.

6. The unexpected coup in Portugal on 25 April 1974 brought the RSA's
defence line to its borders and this changed the government's perceptions
of security in a very dramatic way. Prime Minister Vorster, with his
policy of détente, extended a hand of friendship to the newly independent
states, but in 1974/5, with the approval of the USA , the SADF joined the
civil war in Angola to render assistance to UNITA. Mr Botha explained the
excursion into Angola as the willingness of South Africa to shoulder its
responsibility as an ally of the free world.

7. On 28 September 1978 Mr P.W. Botha was elected as the RSA's eighth
Prime Minister and elaborated the concept of the total onslaught with
greater clarity. The 1979 White Paper on Defence recorded "¼increased
political, economic and military pressure on South Africa¼" and expressed
concern that "¼.the military threat against the RSA is intensifying at an
alarming rate". The idea of a total onslaught against South Africa, as
"¼Moscow's stepping stone to world conquest", became the departure point
for security-related government policy:

a. The Steyn Commission Report (1982) stressed that the Soviet Union's
aim was world domination. Its methods included subversion,
disinformation, psychological war, espionage, diplomatic negotiations,
military and economic aid programmes, terrorism and guerrilla warfare.
The surrogate forces the Soviets were employing included the ANC, SWAPO,
the SACP and other related organisations.


b. Mr Botha said in parliament that "the total onslaught exists in that
there is, under Marxist guidance, an onslaught on our institutions which,
if they were to be destroyed, would cause chaos in this country. It is in
view of this that I advocated a total national strategy...".

8. The threat perception of any country reflects perceived threats in the
light of perceived vulnerabilities. In order to safeguard their security,
states may either try to reduce their vulnerabilities or reduce or
eliminate the perceived threats. South Africa's perception of the threat
was characterised by its multidimensional character. The threat was part
of a global Soviet strategy for world domination, in which South Africa
was one of the targets and in which the aim was the revolutionary
overthrow of the South African political, economic and social order, thus
isolating the Republic. Although neighbouring countries were not
considered to pose a direct military threat to the Republic, the
possibility that they could do so in future, was not ruled out, because
of an unprecedented build-up of sophisticated conventional armament in
those countries. The situation was aggravated by the presence of Soviet,
other East Bloc and Cuban forces in the region, particularly in Angola.
In addition to the latent conventional threat posed by neighbouring
countries, they were also perceived to pose an indirect threat by
granting the liberation movements, such as the ANC, training bases or
transit facilities in their territories. The ANC was singled out as the
main internal revolutionary threat, aided by various countries and
organisations. Although the Soviet Union and East Bloc countries were
described as the most important supporters of the ANC, certain Western
countries were undermining South Africa by lending moral and material
support to the anti-RSA revolutionary movements and by applying sanctions
against and advocating disinvestment in South Africa. Mr Botha put it as
follows : "¼there is an attempt, under Marxist leadership, to bring about
revolution in Southern Africa, more specifically in the Republic of South
Africa. This can no longer be denied. The revolutionary elements are
there, and nothing ... can satisfy the hunger of those powers. They want
nothing but the overthrow of the present order. They want nothing but the
overthrow of the civilisation in this country".

TOTAL NATIONAL STRATEGY

9. The RSA Government believed that it was confronted by a "total
onslaught" and in order to counter it, they had to develop their own
total strategy. The need for such a total strategy was identified in the
White Paper for Defence: "the process of ensuring and maintaining the
sovereignty of a state's authority in a conflict situation has, through
the evolution of warfare, shifted from the purely military to an
integrated national action... the resolution of conflict in the times in
which we now live demands interdepartmental and coordinated actions in
all fields - military, psychological, economic, political, sociological,
technological, diplomatic, ideological, and cultural, etc.

10. In parliament it was stressed that the only counter-strategy against
a total onslaught with any hope of success is also a total strategy -
total resistance must be offered, fragmentary and ad hoc efforts in any
sphere would be futile and pointless. The onslaught must be resisted on a
national basis in all spheres, by all national groups and inhabitants of
the South African subcontinent.

11. This strategy based on principles of self-determination and
protection of minorities, Christian values, civilised norms and general
welfare provided by a capitalist economy and underwritten by strong
security forces were at the foundation of the whole plan. This plan ,
which had the approval of the highest authority, was based on the
fundamental analysis of the enemy's strategy and tried to draw all
believers across the colour lines into a united anti-Marxist alliance.

THE NATIONAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

12. In order to formulate a total strategy to counter the total war being
waged against the RSA, the State established an organisation for managing
the machinery of government. A high degree of orchestration and
coordination is required within the body politic in order to ensure
integrated joint planning by all the Government Departments involved,
which resulted in the formulation of a Total Strategy. This requirement
for joint planning led to the rationalisation of the organisation for
managing the machinery of government into two main systems, i.e.

a. The Welfare System; and

b. The Security Management System..

STATE SECURITY COUNCIL

13. The SSC was established in terms of the Security Intelligence and
State Security Council Act, Act 64 of 1972, as a statutory Cabinet
Committee with the function of advising the Government on:

a. The formulation of national policy and strategy in respect of the
security of the RSA, as well as the implementation of such policy and
strategy.

b. Policy regarding the combatting of any specific threat against the RSA.

c. Intelligence priorities.

14. In terms of the Act the SSC would consist of :

a. The Prime Minister (later President) as chairman.

b. The senior Cabinet minister and the ministers of;

i. Foreign Affairs;

ii. Defence;

iii. Justice;

iv. Law and Order, and

c. The Chief of the SADF, the Commissioner of Police and the
directors-general of National Intelligence, Foreign Affairs and Justice.

15. Other ministers and officials, who were not statutory members of the
Council, were co-opted to attend specific meetings of the Council. The
Minister of Constitutional Development and Planning, the Minister of
National Education and the Minister of Finance were among those co-opted
in this way. The SSC was assisted by a Working Committee, which comprised
the Secretary of the SSC and the heads of departments represented on the
SSC.

16. A permanent secretary to the SSC was first appointed in August 1979.
The secretariat was later expanded to include three main sub-divisions,
one for strategic planning, one for the co-ordination and evaluation of
intelligence and a third for strategic communications. The secretariat of
the SSC was responsible to the office of the Prime Minister/President for:

a. The provision of co-ordinated intelligence to the security management
system.

b. The co-ordination of strategic planning for national security purposes.

c. Co-ordination of the implementation of national security strategies.

d. Co-ordination of strategic communications.

17. In March 1980, the Cabinet approved the first extensive national
strategy, titled, Boek 1/Beleid: Die RSA se Belange en die RSA-Regering
se Doel, Doelstellings en Beleid vir Ordelike Regering. This document
sets out the philosophy of Total War and Total Strategy. Arising from the
threat analysis, the national aims, objectives and policy, as well as the
political, economic, social/psychological and security policies for the
RSA, the independent homelands and Southern Africa, were clearly defined.

18. It is however important to note that the State Security Council Act
only provided the SSC with an advisory function. All recommendations and
advice by the SSC were referred to the Cabinet for further action. The
SSC had no decision-making powers in its own right. This meant that
whereas the SSC was charged with the responsibility for advising the
Government on national security matters, the ultimate responsibility was
vested in the Cabinet. Any recommendations made by the SSC were subject
to final approval by the Cabinet, while the execution of policy was the
responsibility of the various government departments as part of their
normal line functions.

NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY

19. The National Security policy defined the following aims and
objectives:

a. The establishment of a National Security Management System (NSMS),
decentralised to the regional level, based on the doctrine of Total
Strategy - the need for co-ordinated action between all departments - to
address the multidimensional (total) threat.

b. Maintenance of a policy of non-aggression against any other state or
group of states, but with a pro-active posture which could include
pre-emptive action against real or potential aggressors to ensure the
security of the RSA.

c. Provision of co-ordinated, reliable and evaluated intelligence.

d. Protection of the RSA against any form of external aggression or
internal revolution.

f. Involvement of all population groups in the maintenance of law and
order and the protection of the RSA. This included a system of national
(military) service.

g. Maintenance of a conventional military capability to ensure national
security through pro-active steps and self sufficiency in the development
and manufacture of armaments, where practically possible.

h. Ensuring orderly government by maintaining the rule of law and
protecting the country's borders.

20. This strategy, as well as others that followed later, included the
concept of pro-active or forward defence. For this purpose, Africa, south
of the equator, was sub-divided into three areas, namely, the vital area
(the RSA), the tactical area (the neighbouring states) and the strategic
area (countries to the north of the neighbouring states.)

21. The National Security policy made explicit provision for pro-active
actions beyond the borders of the RSA, if necessary, for self-defence or
pre-emptive purposes.

INTERDEPARTMENTAL AND DEPARTMENTAL STRATEGIES

22. In 1980, the SSC laid down the procedure for the planning and
approval of national, interdepartmental and departmental strategies.

a. As the first step, the guidelines for the National Strategy (Total
Strategy) were formulated and approved by the SSC. These guidelines
formed the nucleus of the Total Strategy.

b. Thereafter, the details of the Total Strategy were developed by
inter-departmental committees and working groups with the assistance of
the secretariat of the SSC and the Working Committee. The final draft
Total Strategy had to be submitted to the SSC for approval, after which
it provided the framework for departmental and inter-departmental
planning and implementation.

23. The various departments submitted regular progress reports on the
implementation of specific strategies. These reports were consolidated by
the secretariat and submitted to the SSC, thus enabling the Council to
monitor the progress and scope of implementation.

MANIFESTATION OF THE RSA NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY: GUIDELINES AND
DIRECTIVES

24. The influence of the ANC strategy of revolutionary warfare on the
development of the RSA National Security Strategy can clearly be seen in
the development/manifestation of this strategy. There is a clear
interface/correlation between the development of the ANC strategy and the
counter-revolutionary strategy of the RSA Government.

25. The strategy against the ANC, included the following tasks for the
SADF:

1. The development of the required military infrastructure for
   effective counter-insurgency operations.


b. The prevention and suppression of terrorism against the RSA, including
military actions against bases and training facilities in neighbouring
states.

c. The disruption and immobilisation of ANC operational command
structures and centres.

d. Neutralising the propaganda and espionage threat of the ANC to
military personnel and installations.

e. The protection of the RSA borders and coastal areas against terrorist
infiltration.

f. The protection of national key points against sabotage.

g. Supporting the SA Police in stabilising the internal situation.

26. In the later counter-revolutionary strategy (1986-88), the following
three objectives formed the basis of the strategy:

a. That revolutionary organisation and mobilisation had to be halted so
as to create a situation of stability and lawfulness in South Africa.

b. Continued revolutionary 'contamination' of the population was to be

prevented through effective government and local administration,

particularly in the major unrest areas.

c. The population had to be influenced to accept and support the national
aim of peaceful and evolutionary political change and to combat
revolutionary organisations that sought change through violence.


27. Several types of guidelines, directives and strategies were
formulated by the SSC and submitted to the Cabinet for approval from 1980
to 1990, and sent to departments for implementation.

a. Boek 1/Beleid: Die RSA se Belange en die RSA-Regering se Doel,
Doelstellings en Beleid. (March 1980).

b. SSC Directive no 9, on the implementation of radio propaganda and the
neutralisation of hostile radio broadcasts aimed at the RSA.

c. A total strategy for Southern Africa (October 1980).

d. SSC guidelines for the protection of educational institutions (March
1981).

e. A total strategy against the ANC (August 1981).

f. A plan for the construction of (international) border fences (August
1981).

g. A total strategy for Soweto and other black urban areas (September
1981).

h. Total strategies for Lesotho, Malawi, Botswana, Mozambique, Zimbabwe,
Zambia and Swaziland (November 1981).

i. A total strategy in respect of the role of trade unions in labour
unrest (April 1982).

j. SSC guidelines for economic warfare (April 1982).

k. Guidelines for a total strategy against the UDF (October 1983).

l. Revised authorisation procedure for cross-border military operations
(October 1985).

m. Revised strategy for Southern Africa (May 1986).

n. National strategy for the Revolutionary Onslaught against the RSA

(December 1986).

o. Revision of the functions of the SSC and the addition of a Cabinet

Committee for Security Affairs (November 1989).

p. Guidelines for future secret and covert actions and special operations
(June 1990).

q. Guidelines for a (revised) national security strategy (November 1990).

28. These documents provided the framework for the implementation of
security actions. Each department represented in the SSC was responsible
for the implementation of the strategies applicable to its particular
area of responsibility.


hr>

PART 2

THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR IN SOUTH AFRICA FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE SOUTH
AFRICAN DEFENCE FORCE


INTRODUCTION

1. The revolutionary war in South Africa lasted for more than forty years
but it escalated during the period 1980 - 1990. The main role players
were on the one hand the ANC (MK), and to a lesser degree the PAC (APLA),
assisted by several mass democratic organisations and on the other the
South African Government with its security apparatus, namely the South
African Police (SAP) and the South African Defence Force, (SADF).

2. The principal participants on the side of the revolutionaries were

a. the Charterist Alliance comprising the ANC/SACP/COSATU, with Umkhonto
We Sizwe (MK) as The military wing, and internal front organizations such
as the United Democratic Front (UDF) and later the Mass Democratic
Movement (MDM) and SA National Civic Organization (SANCO);

b. the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) and its military wing, the Azanian
People's Liberation Army (APLA); and

c. the Black Consciousness Movement of Azania (BCMA) and its military
wing, the Azanian National Liberation Army (AZANLA).

THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR

THE BEGINNING : 1912 - 1958

3. The ANC was established in Bloemfontein in 1912 to fight for the
political rights of the black population of South Africa. From 1921 to
1950 the ANC aligned itself with the South African Communist Party (SACP
- which was formed in 1921) in several labour disputes and strikes
against employers and the SA government. However, it was unsuccessful in
making real progress in securing political rights for blacks in South
Africa.

4. In 1948 the National Party won the general election and as promised in
its election manifesto and after nationwide strikes, the SA Government
banned the SACP in 1950. The result was that the party went underground,
creating front organisations through which it continued its operations.
The most important front organisation was the Congress Alliance, which
drafted the Freedom Charter in 1955. In 1958 the ANC incorporated the
Freedom Charter into its constitution.


BANNING OF THE ANC AND PAC

5. After the adoption of the Freedom Charter the ANC alliance continued
with violent activities. Violent demonstrations and strikes became common
as the SACP, the PAC and the ANC cadres were doing their utmost to turn
every possible incident into physical confrontation and conflict. In
early 1960 both the ANC and the PAC decided to organise an anti-pass law
campaign. The response of the security forces to this campaign resulted
in the Sharpeville shootings on 21 March 60.

6. The Sharpeville incident reverberated throughout South Africa and
around the world. Riots and protest erupted in black townships. On 30 Mar
60 the RSA government declared a state of emergency and enacted the
Unlawful Organisations Act , Act No 34 of 1960 which on 8 Apr 60
formalised the banning of both the ANC and PAC.

M-PLAN AND RIVONIA TRAIL

7. After the banning of the ANC and PAC, the command of the ANC developed
a strategy which later became known as the M-Plan (named after Mr Nelson
Mandela). It was a revolutionary strategy, which made provision for the
division of the Black townships into zones, each having a local
revolutionary committee appointed by the regional command of the ANC. The
M-Plan also made provision for an operation, called " Operation
Mayibuye". The aim of this plan was to seize power in the RSA, through
acts of violence and sabotage. The second part of the plan defined
certain rural areas of the RSA where guerrillas were to trigger a
revolution.

8. At a secret meeting in June 1961 the ANC decided to establish an armed
wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK) - Spear of the Nation. They purchased a
small farm, called Lilliesleaf, from which to conduct "operations", while
Mr Mandela visited several countries to gain support for their campaign
against the RSA. The first batches of MK recruits left the RSA in July
1962.

9. Before the ANC/SACP could implement the M-Plan, the SAP raided the
Lilliesleaf farm on 11 Jul 63 and arrested most of the ANC (MK)
leadership. The Rivonia Trial followed, where Messrs Mandela, Sisulu,
Goldberg, Mbeki, Mhlaba, Motsoaledi and Mlangeni were found guilty on
charges of high treason and sentenced to life imprisonment.

THE MOROGORO CONFERENCE

10. After the Rivonia Trial the ANC, SACP and PAC made attempts to
infiltrate3 the RSA via Southern Fhodesia (see Part 1, page 3, para 5).
In 1969 the ANC decided that a new strategy was necessary and a
conference was held in Morogoro, Tanzania, where the document "Strategy
and Tactics of the ANC" was drawn up . It was a document full of optimism
for extending the guerrilla war to the classic mobile phase which would
lead to the collapse of the SA government. The document spelled out three
stages, namely

a. the initial guerrilla phase which would involve acts of armed
propaganda, sabotage, landmines and car bombs;

b. the equilibrium phase in which strong MK units would engage the
government's forces in mobile warfare, and

c. the third phase, which would culminate in a general offensive which
would coincide with the collapse of the the RSA economy, demoralization
of the government's security forces and the isolation of the government.


STUDENT UNREST


11. The sixties will be remembered because of worldwide student unrest.
The neutralisation of the ANC and PAC inside the country created a vacuum
which was filled by a group of Black students who formed a student
organisation, called the South African Students' Organisation (SASO).
Steve Biko was elected as its first president. This was followed by the
establishment of the Black People's Convention in July 1972. Together
they formed the Black Consciousness Movement (BCM) to carry on with Steve
Biko's Black Consciousness Ideology (The Black man's struggle for
empowerment.

12. 1976 was characterised by ongoing student unrest in Soweto. The
unrest and the death of Steve Biko in detention in 1977 caused a mass of
students to join the ANC.

INDEPENDENCE FOR THE PORTUGUESE COLONIES

13. One of the biggest problems facing the ANC was the lack of bases
close to the border of the RSA. In 1974 the Portuguese government was
overthrown in a coup which led to FRELIMO's accession to power in
Mozambique and in Angola of the MPLA, after the collapse of the Alvor
Accord and the expulsion of the FNLA and UNITA from Luanda. This
development gave the ANC the much-needed bases close to the RSA border.

"PEOPLE'S WAR"

14. In 1978 the ANC leadership began to investigate a new strategy and
undertook study tours to many Third World countries. This was followed by
a visit of a high-profile delegation (including Messrs Tambo, Mbeki,
Hani, Slovo and Modise) to Vietnam to study that country's struggle
against the USA. In their report presented to the ANC executive in
Luanda, key aspects of the Vietnamese struggle were highlighted, for
example "the combination of a political and military struggle, the
mobilisation of the whole of the people to fight the enemy; the unity of
the internal situation and international solidarity; and the party's
leadership role over the armed forces." This was a classic recipe for a
"total" revolutionary war.

15. After this visit to Vietnam the ANC formulated a new strategy for a
"people's war". Officially it was termed "The Four Pillars of the
Revolution - a Strategy for People's War." These pillars were

a. the all-round activity of the underground structures of the ANC;

b. the united mass action of the people (mass mobilisation);

c. the armed offensive, and

d. the international drive to isolate the RSA.

16. The document of the Political-military Committee, Planning for
People's War, was drafted in 1983. The National Executive Committee of
the ANC approved the document but stated that "we have to be a little
more clear about what we mean in practice". Therefore the ANC leadership
gave more details about what was meant by this strategy in official ANC
publications:

a. In Sechaba it was emphasized that

i. the role of the workers and trade unions will be to bring South
Africa's economy to a halt ;

ii. white "anti-apartheid" movements must be created to oppose compulsory
military service and the war in Angola ;

iii. the "people's army" must be strengthened so that the ANC "could
march in the vanguard of semi-spontaneous mass upsurges", and

iv. the masses must be armed and trained as part-time guerrillas.

b. In The African Communist it was stated that : "by people's war we mean
a war in which a liberation army becomes rooted amongst the people who
progressively participate actively in the armed struggle both politically
and militarily, including the possibility of engaging in partial or
general insurrections. The present disparity in strength between the
enemy forces and ours determines the protracted nature of the struggle
... such a struggle will lead inevitably to a revolutionary situation in
which our plan and aim must be the seizure of power through ... whatever
ways might present themselves."

c. In Sechaba it was explained that the goal of transforming the "armed
offensive into a people's war remains one that we must pursue with the
greatest vigour. Our mass military offensive must aim to increase the
number of casualties among the enemy's armed forces, to disperse and
reduce these forces, make it increasingly impossible for them to defend
themselves and undermine the material-economic base ..."

d. In another article the concept of arming the people was discussed "In
other words ... it must become part of a policy to involve more and more
armed people as organised contingents in support of our struggle and
acting under our leadership."

KABWE CONFERENCE 1985

17. With the influx of new recruits in the late seventies and the new
bases in the Frontline States, the ANC decided to hold a conference at
Kabwe, Zambia to examine its new strategy. In a report, Commission on
Cadre Policy and Ideological Work, the conference recommended that the ANC

a. should establish cores in existing youth organisations;

b. must be in charge of the process; and

c. should educate youth and religious groups and other cultural
organisations to translate their beliefs into the rejection of apartheid
and to become more involved in the struggle. This was the birth of the
concept of people's education - revolution before education.

PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PEOPLE'S WAR AND THE FOUR -PILLAR STRATEGY

PILLAR 1 : ALL-ROUND ACTIVITY OF THE UNDERGROUND STRUCTURES AND UNITED
MASS ACTION OF THE PEOPLE

18. One of the biggest problems facing the ANC was the lack of bases
inside the country. Mr R. Kasrils explained this problem in Sechaba :
"¼the problem facing us is that the bulk of our army is recruited and
trained outside the country, and remains there". It was therefore
necessary for the ANC to develop, organise, arm and train MK cadres
inside the country to lead the revolution.

19. In the same article Mr. Kasrils outlined the organisation of MK
inside the country:

a. Guerrilla units (operating in the rural areas of the RSA).

b. Underground fighting groups (sabotage and assassinations in urban
parts of SA).

c. Self-defence Units (SDU-security elements for the ANC cadres and
fronts).

20. Other publications outlined the role of the underground as follows :

a. "¼(it) links the armed struggle to the masses, popularises the skills
of warfare, and prevents professional combatants being isolated."

b. "The underground acquires and transports weapons, spreads the politics
of the movement, recruits cadres, observes targets and gathers
information."

c. "¼(the underground) must plan its actions and ensure that these
reinforce and merge with people's mass action."

PILLAR 2 : MASS MOBILISATION

21. The second pillar of the revolutionary strategy, that of mass
mobilisation, depended upon the successful implementation of the first
pillar. The implementation of the first pillar - that of underground
structures - created an environment where the masses cooperated and
adhered to the demands of the revolutionary structures. One of these
organisations was the United Democratic Front (UDF), which was
established on 20 Aug 83 as "a broad front of popular resistance". The
UDF claimed that over 700 different groups in South Africa were members
of this loose-knit coalition. Although the UDF repeatedly denied that it
had any links with the ANC, its political agenda was almost parallel to
that of the ANC. The ANC saw the UDF as a political arm of revolution,
under one command, focusing on the central question of all revolutions -
the question of state power. Because of its involvement in violence, the
RSA government declared the UDF an illegal organisation in 1986. In 1989
the Mass Democratic Movement (MDM) was formed, which was in fact the old
UDF under a new guise. The MDM saw its aim as to deepen the isolation of
the regime, maximize unity against it and weaken its ability to resist
the struggle for a democratic and non-racial South Africa. The SA
National Civics Organisation (SANCO) assumed a large part of the role of
the UDF and MDM.

22. During the period 1984 to 1989 members of the ANC's underground saw
themselves as the guardians of the revolutionary forces inside the
country. According to the M-Plan and the strategy of people's war they
created the following:

a. Liberated Zones. These were no-go areas for the police and other
administrative functionaries. The aim of this step was to make the
country ungovernable and to establish political and para-military control
over communities through SDUs and Combat Units and for these areas to
serve as safe areas for MK.

b. Alternative structures. After an area had been "liberated",
alternative revolutionary structures were instituted. The most prominent
alternative structure was civic organisations that were locally based and
aimed at mobilizing the people within a specific area around bread and
butter issues. Their mass base however, offered a tremendous potential
for militant action.


23. The underground structures determined their own disciplinary code
where they enforced their will by intimidation and fear - those found
buying goods from white-owned shops were forced by the comrades to eat
their soap powder or drink their cooking oil. One of the most feared
methods of intimidation was the so-called people's courts and the
gruesome necklaces where anyone accused of collaborating with the RSA
government was sentenced to death by the necklace method. An example of
the execution of a so-called collaborator was the necklace murder of
councillor Benjamin Kinikini and his sons on 21 March 1985, while a Dutch
television crew filmed the incident. Necklacing was a very contentious
subject and several comments/statements were recorded, for example :

a. In Sechaba Mr Chris Hani wrote that "the necklace was a weapon ... to
remove this cancer (of collaborators) from our society ... to cleanse the
townships from the very disruptive and even lethal activities of the
puppets and collaborators. I refuse to condemn our people when they mete
out their own traditional forms of justice to those who collaborate."

b. "Here (in townships/liberated zones) collaborators and informers live
in fear of petrol, either as petrol bombs being hurled at their homes and
reducing them to rack and ruin, or as petrol dousing their treacherous
bodies which we set alight, and burn them to a charred despicable mess".

c. "We want to make the death of a collaborator so grotesque that people
will never think of it."

24. Between 1984 and 1989, 399 people died as a result of necklacing. An
additional 372 were burnt to death in their homes or after petrol had
been poured over them and they were torched to death. The result of this
intimidation was that although a very small part of the country was
affected the government decided to stabilise the situation by declaring a
partial state of emergency in South Africa in 1985. In 1986 it was
extended to a national state of emergency.

25. Armed violence was merely one of many strategies adopted by
resistance groups in the RSA between 1976 and 1994. Further actions were
also aimed at political, economic, social, educational and psychological
bases of society. Over time, however, violent acts were increasingly
integrated with other strategies.

26. Armed action by the ANC (MK) and PAC (APLA) against the RSA
Government was initially conducted from the RSA's neighbouring states.
From the mid-eighties onwards, it also took on a strong internal
character.

THIRD PILLAR : ARMED STRUGGLE - THE VIOLENT COMPONENT OF THE REVOLUTION

27. This pillar of MK's armed struggle was under the command of the ANC
headquarters in Lusaka. In an interview with Der Spiegel, the president
of the ANC, Mr O. Tambo, explained how command and control within the ANC
were executed :. "We convey messages and tell people what has to be
done...Our followers often decide for themselves what targets they want
to attack. However, they are organized. (The command structure) was built
by our people. The people follow our advice."


BASE AREAS AND ACCESS ROUTES

28. The ANC (MK) and the PAC (APLA) were supported in their liberation
struggle by the African states. This commitment to the struggle was
reflected in the following agreements:

a. Lusaka Manifesto (1969);

b. Mogadishu Declaration (1971);

c. Dar es Salaam Declaration (1975); and

d. the Arusha Declaration (1984) which refers to the collective
protection of the ANC and PAC against South African retaliation.

29. From 1963 onward the operating structures underwent several changes,
eg

a. From 1963 the main base areas, headquarters and training facilities of
the liberation movements were situated in Dar es Salaam, but from the
late seventies and beginning of 1980, these were moved to Lusaka.

b. In 1976 Angola became the main military training facility of the ANC
(MK).

c. Between October 1976 and August 1977 Lusaka was the main operational
centre, while Botswana, Lesotho and especially Swaziland were the main
transit routes for the infiltration of terrorists, arms and equipment
destined for the RSA. (Eighty per cent of the MK members arrested in the
RSA between January 1977 and April 1978 had infiltrated through
Swaziland.)

d. After April 1978 Mozambique was the pivot of the ANC's armed action
against the RSA, but MK was prohibited from operating directly from
Mozambican territory.

e. By 1980, regional headquarters had been established in Botswana,
Swaziland, Mozambique and Lesotho, for the planning, control and
monitoring of MK operations. Swaziland, especially, was an unwilling host
and continuously took political and security action against armed MK
members.

f. After ZANU (PF) came to power in Zimbabwe on 18 April 1980, Zimbabwe's
territory became accessible to both MK and APLA as an assembly and
transit area. In June and July 1983 the first direct infiltrations by MK
members from Zimbabwe to the RSA occurred. By 1985, two operational
headquarters and two sub-headquarters had been established in Zimbabwe.

g. After the conclusion of the Nkomati Accord with Mozambique on 16 March
1984, use of Botswana, Lesotho and Zimbabwe for actions against the RSA
increased in importance for the ANC and MK. A clandestine MK presence
(and headquarters) were however maintained in Mozambique and in the last
part of 1985, Mozambique, especially Maputo, was again the main centre
for the ANC's armed campaign against the RSA, although actions were
launched mainly through Swaziland. The Swazi government tried to prevent
this, but did not have the capacity to deny the ANC and MK the use of its
territory.

COMMAND AND CONTROL

30. Up to 1985 MK operations in the RSA were controlled by a
Revolutionary Council with regional headquarters in Lusaka, Maputo and
Maseru. After 1985 the command and control function was vested in the
Politico-Military Council (PMC), which oversaw two divisions - the
Political Headquarters and the Military Headquarters or High Command. The
High Command was commanded by a Special Operations Group and Regional
Political-Military Committees (RPMCs). Each RPMC had its so-called
'machineries' or task groups responsible for specific geographic areas in
the RSA. In time RPMC's were brought into existence in Botswana,
Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Swaziland and Lesotho.

a. RPMC Maputo. From April 1978 the RPMC in Maputo was responsible for
operations in the Transvaal (Witwatersrand, Vereeniging, Eastern
Transvaal and Northern Transvaal) as well as Natal. Swaziland was the
main transit area.

b. RPMC Swaziland. By 1983/84, Swaziland had its own RPMC and operations
into the Transvaal and Natal were conducted from Swaziland, with support
from the RPMC in Maputo. The RPMC in Swaziland was disbanded in 1988 and
all subsequent operations were controlled from Maputo.

c. RPMC Botswana. MK actions from Botswana were controlled from an
operational headquarters in Lusaka up to 1983. In 1983/84 a RPMC was
established in Gaberone, which was mainly responsible for operations in
Western and Northern Transvaal and the Northern Cape. The Botswana RPMC
functioned up to 1988, after which it was withdrawn to Lusaka.

d. RPMC Lesotho. An operational headquarters was established in Maseru,
Lesotho in 1978. The headquarters was replaced with a RPMC in 1983/84,
which was responsible for operations in Eastern Cape, Border/Transkei and
the Orange Free State. The RPMC was active until August 1988.

e. RPMC Zimbabwe. Up to April 1984, MK actions in and from Zimbabwe were
controlled by an operational headquarters in Lusaka. In June 1985 a RPMC
was established in Harare and two sub-headquarters were established in
Bulawayo and Masvingo. The RPMC was responsible for actions in Venda and
Northern and North-Western Transvaal.

MANIFESTATION OF THE REVOLUTION INSIDE SOUTH AFRICA

31. The situation inside the country escalated from 1983 and the
following is a catalogue of the violent and non-violent components of the
revolutionary strategy of the ANC and its allies, as well as the PAC and
BCMA for the period 1976 - 1994. The violent onslaught can be divided
into four periods :

a. 14 October 1976 to 31 August 1983.

i. A total of 362 acts of violence were perpetrated in the RSA in this
period. Of these, 170 (47 per cent) were incidents of sabotage mainly
aimed at railway property, police stations, government buildings and the
electricity supply infrastructure. Forty eight were offensive and
comprised 24 attacks, mainly against police stations and 24 contacts with
the SA Police. Approximately 40 MK members were killed and 155 were
arrested. Eleven security force members were killed and 24 were injured.

ii. By 31 August 1981 a sharp increase in the use of limpet mines had
been noted and the use of conventional explosives and detonators appeared
to have been discontinued.

iii. Eighty eight per cent of the 362 incidents occurred in urban areas
and 12 per cent in rural areas.

iv. Some of the most important incidents were the following :

(1) 24 November 1977. Bomb explosion at the Carlton

Centre in Johannesburg. 17 civilians were injured.

(2) 8 December 1977. Bomb explosion at parking area

in Benoni. 12 vehicles damaged.

(3) 24 February 1978. Bomb explosion at Daveyton,

Springs. A building was badly damaged.

(4) 1/2 June 1980. Sabotage at SASOL 1 and NATREF at

Sasolburg, and SASOL II at Secunda.

(5) 21 July 1981: Sabotage of an electrical transformer in Pretoria;

(6) 12 August 1981: Rocket attack on Voortrekkerhoogte, Pretoria.

(7) 19 August 1982 : Sabotage at Koeberg Nuclear Power

Station.

(8) 20 May 1983 : Motorcar bomb in Church Street, Pretoria. 19 people
were killed and 200 injured.

v. The most important development during the period 1 September 1980 to
31 August 1982 was the decision of the PMC to establish a so-called
"People's Army". The MK members played an important role in the "People's
Army" in intensifying the revolutionary onslaught against the state.
Political and military training of MK members inside the RSA and in
neighbouring countries commenced at this time.

b. 1 September 1983 to 31 August 1985:

i. This period was marked by an increase of violence and re-direction of
focus from so-called "hard targets" (security forces and infrastructure)
to "soft targets" (civilian institutions and personnel).

ii. There was also an upswing in violent incidents. Between September
1983 and August 1984, there were 92 incidents and in the following year,
101 incidents.

iii. MK began to establish military structures and political cells in
some of the township areas, which were developed into "base" or so-called
"no-go" areas. Military and political training in the RSA and in
neighbouring states continued.

iv . The end of the period was marked by a blurring of the distinction
between "armed incidents and unrest".

v. The most important incidents were the following :

(1) 11 October 1983. Sabotage of a fuel storage tank in Warmbaths.

(2) 10 November 1983. Contact between SA Police and MK at Alldays while
the MK unit was infiltrating from Zimbabwe. Four MK members were killed.

(3) 7 December 1983. Sabotage of buildings of the Administrative Council
of Johannesburg.

(4) 6 April 1984. Sabotage of buildings of the Administrative Council of
Bloemfontein.


1. 13 May 1984. Sabotage of a fuel storage depot in

Durban.

(6) 17 March 1985. A limpet mine exploded under a SA Police vehicle in
Mamelodi.

(7) 30 April 1985. A limpet mine exploded at an Anglo American building
in Johannesburg, causing extensive damage

c. 1 September 1985 to 31 August 1989

i. The period was marked by the maintenance of the level of MK activity.
The number of incidents were :

(1) 1 September 1985 to 31 August 1986 - 245.

(2) 1 September 1986 to 31 August 1987 - 208.

(3) 1 September 1987 to 31 August 1988 - 245.

1. 1 September 1988 to 31 August 1989 - 315.


ii. There was a sharp shift in emphasis from "hard" to "soft" targets.



Period
 

% Hard Targets
 

% Soft Targets



1983


1984


1985


1986


1988


1989
 

80


63


33


17


31


17
 

20


37


63


83


69


83


iii. This shift in emphasis saw the degeneration of the "liberation
struggle" into a planned campaign of armed struggle where the lives and
property of ordinary South Africans were destroyed in the hope of gaining
political benefits.

iv. Limpet mines, hand grenades and small arms were increasingly used,
and landmine incidents occurred in Northern and Eastern Transvaal and
Northern Natal until the end of 1987. The highest number of incidents
occurred in September and October 1988, just before the municipal
elections.

v. The concept of a "People's Army" was further developed in the
establishment of self-defence units (SDUs) and combat groups, with
locally-based MK members acting as the core. The structures were manned
by members trained internally and in neighbouring states.


vi. From 1986/87 the smuggling of arms for the manning and arming of
internal MK units increased.

vii. From 1988 the constitutionally independent Transkei was increasingly
used by MK and APLA as a base area for the training of recruits and for
armed actions in Eastern Cape, Western Cape and Natal.

viii. The most important incidents were the following :

1. 26 November 1985. A private vehicle detonated two landmines on a
   farm in the Weipe area.


(2) 27 November 1985. Three MK members of the Special Operations Group
infiltrating from Maputo, tried to launch an attack with 122mm rockets on
SASOL II at Secunda. All three were killed in the follow-up operation.

(3) 23 December 1985. A limpet mine exploded in the Sanlam Centre, a
shopping complex, in Amanzimtoti. Five civilians were killed and 61
injured.

(4) 4 January 1986. A civilian vehicle detonated a landmine in the
Ellisras district near the Botswana border. Two civilians were killed and
two were injured.

(5) 7 May 1986. A limpet mine exploded in the Benmore shopping centre in
Sandton. Extensive damage was caused.

(6) 14 June 1986. A car bomb exploded in front of the Garfunkel
Restaurant in Durban. Three civilians were killed and 69 were injured.

(7) 24 June 1986. A limpet mine exploded at the Wimpy Bar at the
President Holiday Inn in Johannesburg. 20 civilians were injured.

(8) 6 October 1986. A SADF vehicle detonated a land mine near Mbunzi in
Eastern Transvaal. Six SADF members were injured.

(9) 28 March 1987. A civilian vehicle detonated a double landmine in
Northern Transvaal. Four occupants were killed and one injured.

d. 1 September 1989 to 31 August 1994

i. The start of the period was marked by the legalization of previously
banned organizations on 2 February 1990 and by talks between the
government and the ANC with a view to find a negotiated political
solution for the RSA. The PAC did not initially join these talks.

ii. The freedom to operate inside the RSA was used by the ANC, SACP and
PAC as well as other organizations to expand their power bases and to
erode those of their opponents.

iii. The PAC/APLA also became active in the RSA.

iv. One hundred and eighty one armed incidents occurred between 1 January
1990 and 31 August 1990. Five MK members were killed and 192 MK members
and sympathizers were arrested.

v. The SDUs were re-designated "self-protection units" (SPUs) to avoid
accusations that agreements between the government and the ANC were being
violated.

vi. By 1991 armed actions had increased and it became increasingly
difficult to distinguish between armed incidents and violence deriving
from general internal unrest.

vii. By 30 September 1992, there were 203 SDU/SPU structures in the
townships, and there was strong suspicion that a further 143 existed.
Most of those identified were in the Witwatersrand and KwaZulu/Natal.

viii. The aim was to create so-called liberated areas on the East Rand,
Vaal Triangle, Western Cape and Natal Midlands.

ix. By September 1993 the Transkei was consolidated as a base area for MK
actions in Ciskei, Eastern Cape and Natal.


THE STRATEGY OF THE PAN-AFRICANIST CONGRESS (PAC/APLA)

BACKGROUND

32. After the banning of the PAC in 1960 militant PAC members founded a
paramilitary movement called POQO ( ie "pure", "we stand alone" or "black
alone"). POQO's aim was to create a climate of chaos and panic through
carefully planned and well-executed armed action. During the period 1962
to 1963 POQO was responsible for isolated incidents but in 1963 the SAP
arrested the most prominent POQO leaders and thus effectively neutralised
the organisation. In 1968 the military wing of the PAC became known as
the Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA).

33. The aim of the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) was to overthrow the SA
government by revolutionary means to establish an "Africanist socialist
democracy". The primary aim of APLA was the seizure of state political
power by means of an armed revolution.

STRATEGY

34. The PAC/APLA's strategy for the take-over of government was based on
the classic revolutionary model, ie

a. a national "liberation struggle" or "people's war", and

b. a social revolution with the aim of establishing a new socialist order.

PAC/APLA ACTIONS

35. The Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA) was not a substantial
factor in the armed struggle or revolutionary war but they played a
leading role in the development of the Soweto unrest in Jun 76. APLA's
military capabilities increased from an estimated 300 trained members in
1982/83 to approximately 2700 trained members in 1991/92. By 1992,
approximately 300 members were deployed internally, mainly in the
Transkei. The PAC had not joined the political dialogue between the
government and the ANC and was not party to any agreements.

36. From 22 February 1991 to 6 February 1994, APLA was responsible for 77
acts of violence in the RSA. The actions were scattered throughout the
Eastern Cape, Transkei, Western Cape, Witwatersrand, Northern Transvaal,
Natal and the Free State.

37. Major APLA actions in this period included:

a. 17 February 1992. Kathlehong : Three SAP members were killed and three
wounded when their vehicle was attacked with AK-47 rifles and 9 mm
pistols.

b. 28 November 1992. King Williamstown : Four persons were killed and 17
were wounded during an attack on a golf club, in which R-4 and R-5
rifles, petrol bombs and hand grenades were used.

c. 5 December 1992. Queenstown : A limpet mine exploded in a restaurant.
One person was killed and 19 were injured.

d. 1 May 1993. East London : Four persons were killed in an attack on
Highgate Hotel; an AK-47 rifle and a F-1 hand grenades were used.

e. 25 July 1993. Cape Town : Eleven people were killed in an attack on St
James' Church. AK-47 and R-5 rifles and hand grenades were used. Carl
Zimbiri and another person admitted responsibility.

f. 4 September 1993. Ladybrand : R1 million in damage was caused in an
attack on a hotel. Automatic weapons, petrol bombs and hand grenades were
used. Carl Zimbiri and Ropa Honda admitted responsibility.

g. 30 December 1993. Observatory, Cape Town : Four persons were killed
and five were injured in an attack with R-4 rifles and a rifle grenade on
Heidelberg Tavern. Carl Joma accepted responsibility.

ESCALATION OF THE PEOPLE'S WAR : INTERNAL UNREST

38. In 1981, promotion of unrest in schools and the labour force as well
as targeted actions by MK were the main components of the "People's War".
In 1985/86 activities in these fields were intensified and expanded to
efforts to disrupt health services and administration of justice, to
undermine the SADF, to organise mass action and create so-called
"liberated areas" in the townships.

39. By September 1985, the ANC alliance had established a support
infrastructure in the neighbouring states, especially Mozambique and
Swaziland, for the smuggling of arms, ammunition and explosives into the
RSA.

40. MK members integrated inside South Africa with the so-called "mass
combat units", to give substance to the "People's War." By August 1992,
an estimated 1500 MK members had been identified in these actions, and by
August 1993, an estimated 6500 MK members were involved in integrated
actions of this kind.

41. By August 1986 the ANC alliance was mobilizing resistance amongst the
youth, students, women, labour and religious groups. National structures
such as the National Education Crisis Committee (NECC), COSATU, and a
number of youth and women's organizations, were created to ensure
co-ordinated actions countrywide.

42. In September 1984 the UDF called for a change of emphasis from
passive resistance to more militant and violent action. By 1984, the UDF
had established regional organizations in the Western and Eastern Cape,
Border, Transvaal, Natal and Northern Transvaal. UDF planning in
September 1985 aimed at the creation of a situation of ungovernability,
and at the establishment of "people's power".

43. Three periods can be identified in the development of internal unrest
:

a. June 1976 to 31 August 1984

i. In 1980/81, the country was ravaged by unrest at schools, with the
Eastern and Western Cape as the focal points. On 6 October 1980, for
instance, 19 000 pupils in Port Elizabeth were evicted from their classes
by radical students.

ii. The economy suffered extensive strikes in Western and Eastern Cape,
Durban and the PWV area in 1980/81. In 1980 there were 207 strikes in the
RSA and 282 between 1 January and 31 August 1981.

iii. The increase in rent and service fees in Soweto in August 1980 led
to extensive violence in October and November 1980.

b. 1 September 1984 to 31 August 1989

i. Approximately 48 000 incidents of unrest and rioting occurred in the
RSA in this period. There were high levels of unrest between 3 September
1984 and 31 August 1986, after which the situation levelled off and a
relative low was experienced in 1988/89. From September 1989 to 31 August
1994, however, incidents of unrest increased sharply.

ii. Violent conflicts between supporters of the UDF, Black Power and
Pan-Africanist organizations occurred in Eastern Cape and between the UDF
and Inkatha in the Durban area. The conflict between Inkatha and the
ANC/UDF later spread to Pietermaritzburg, the Natal Midlands and Northern
Natal. By August 1989, more than 60 per cent of all politically motivated
violence in the RSA occurred in Natal.

iii. Between 1 September 1984 and 31 August 1989 the following property
was destroyed or extensively damaged during rioting:

(1) 7187 private homes, mainly in townships, and including 1084 homes of
members of the SA Police (up to June 1980).

(2) 1779 schools.


(3) 1265 shops and factories.

(4) 81 offices, mainly of third tier authorities (up to June 1990).

(5) 66 post offices (up to 30 June 1990).

(6) 49 churches (up to 30 June 1990).

(7) 29 clinics (up to 30 June 1990).

(8) 12188 private delivery vehicles.

(9) 10318 buses.

(10) 4450 vehicles of the SA Police.

(11) 152 trains (up to 30 June 1990).


iv. From 1 September 1985 to 31 August 1986, damage of approximately
R90,54 million was caused in riots.

v. From 1 September 1984 to 31 August 1989, 399 persons were "necklaced"
and 372 died when their homes or their persons were doused with fuel and
set alight.

vi. On average 271 schools were subject to boycotts each day in September
1985, 351 in April 1986 and 219 in August 1986.

vii. The involvement of MK internally established in the townships was
confirmed. In March 1986, seven MK members were killed in anti-riot
actions in Guguletu near Cape Town. They were all also registered members
of the Cape Youth Congress, which was among the organisations responsible
for organising the rioting.

c. 1 September 1989 to 31 August 1994

i. The development of internal unrest during this period must be seen
against the background of the prevailing political/ military
negotiations, the transitional period and the run-up to the general
elections on 27 April 1994.

ii. Incidents of unrest increased from 1989 to 1994 on the following
lines; 8337 in 1989, 15772 in 1990, 13592 in 1991, 12780 in 1992, 16066
in 1993 and 8154 up to 30 April 1994. By April 1994, KwaZulu/Natal and
the East Rand were experiencing the highest incidence of violence, while
relatively low levels were reported in Western and Eastern Cape.

BLACK ON BLACK VIOLENCE

44. Three dimensions can be distinguished:

a. The violent conflict between the Charterists and the Inkatha Freedom
Party (IFP) in KwaZulu/Natal and on the East Rand.

b. The rivalry which existed between factions of the ANC and PAC in
general.

c. Violent actions undertaken to neutralize/destroy local authorities in
the townships, by intimidating these authorities through murders,
necklacing, the setting alight of homes, petrol bombing and armed
attacks. Alternative political ("Civics"), para-military (SDUs/SPUs) and
legal ("People's Courts") structures were put in place. The townships
were regarded as "no-go" or "liberated" areas. Murders, including
necklacing and fire bombing of houses with their inhabitants inside and
the destruction of private property characterised the strategy employed
in establishing and consolidating control in the so-called "liberated"
areas.

45. Between 1 January 1990 and 31 December 1990, 2109 petrol bombings,
1009 incidents of arson, 1369 murders, 182 hand grenade attacks and 71
explosions, related to this campaign, were recorded in the RSA. During
the same period, 666 members of the security forces were killed and 635
were injured, 202 rioters were killed by the security forces and 2377
civilians were killed while 2396 were injured by rioters.


46. Between 31 August 1985 and 30 September 1993 the position of third
tier (local) authorities worsened dramatically :



Serial No
 

Date
 

Total
 

Functioning
 

Not functioning



1


2


3


4


5


6
 

31 Aug 85


31 Aug 86


30 Nov 90


31 Aug 91


16 Sep 92


30 Sep 93
 

235


235


262


275


269


269
 

202


122


158


127


113


75
 

34


53


104


148


156


194


47. By September 1993 the SDUs/SPUs had become the main elements involved
in actions to destabilise the townships in the RSA, Ciskei, Boputhatswana
and the self-governing states. The use of grenades, other small arms,
necklaces and arson characterised the "struggle" in the townships.
Growing numbers of SDU/SPU members were trained in the handling of hand
grenades and arms by MK, in both urban and rural areas.

48. During the period 1 September 1990 to 31 August 1994, 12921 persons
were killed.

ACTIONS AGAINST SECURITY FORCES

49. Members of the security forces were also particular targets
especially in the townships. Between 1 September 1984 and 31 August 1990,
13540 attacks against members of the security forces were recorded and
between 1990 and 1994, another 7078. Between 1 September 1990 and 31
August 1994, 756 members of the security forces were killed.

FAR RIGHT WING INVOLVEMENT IN VIOLENCE

50. From 1990, far right wing organizations were also involved in various
incidents in the RSA. These actions were aimed at all parties involved in
the process of transformation.

51. The more important incidents were :

a. May 1990. A bomb explosion at COSATU offices in Rustenburg.

b. June 1990. A bomb explosion at the National Party offices in Auckland
Park, Johannesburg and Roodepoort.

1. July 1990. A bomb explosion occurred in the Breë Street taxi-rank,
   Johannesburg. 27 people injured.


d. July 1990. An ambush of a bus near KwaMashu, Durban. 7 people killed
and 27 injured.

e. July 1991. A bomb explosion at Hillview High School in Pretoria.

f. April 1992. Explosion at the Rand Show, Johannesburg. 9 people injured.

g. September 1993. A bomb explosion at a shopping centre in
Bronkhorstspruit.

SMUGGLING OF ARMS AND AMMUNITION

52. Violent actions by the ANC, APLA, the IFP, right wing organizations
and organized crime resulted in a sharp rise in the demand for arms and
ammunition, which were chiefly smuggled to the RSA from Mozambique,
either directly, or via Swaziland; and via Namibia from Angola. Members
of all the above organizations were arrested and charged with smuggling
arms and illegal possession of arms and ammunition.

53. The numbers of incidents concerning the smuggling of weapons between
1990 and 1994 were as follows (SA Police figures):

a. 1990 : 7315

b. 1991 : 9702

c. 1992 : 10566


d. 1993 : 9543

e. 1994 : 8808





===========================================================================

PART 3

ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONS OF THE SA DEFENCE FORCE

Appendix A : Organisation of the SADF

B : Organisation of the SA Army

C : Organisation of Wit Command

D : Organisation of the SAAF

E : Organisation of the SAN

F : Organisation of the SAMS

G : Organisation of Special Forces

H : Organisation of MID

ORGANISATION IN BROAD OUTLINE

1. Introduction. The SA Defence Force was a monolithic (one commander)
organisation under the military command of the Chief of the Defence Force
(CSADF) who was accountable to the Minister of Defence for implementing
the South African government's Defence policy. The Minister, therefore,
was responsible for the political control of the force while the CSADF
was responsible for its employment. (See Appendix A for the Organisation
of the SANDF).

2. Command. The supreme command of the SADF was vested in the State
President in terms of the Constitution but all normal command functions
were carried out by CSADF. Command is the function of giving orders along
the command line to subordinate commanders, who in turn interpret them
and give orders to their subordinate commanders until the lowest level of
command is reached. The line of command is shown in red on the
transparencies.

3. Supporting Services. The CSADF was assisted by certain supporting
services under his command that provided him with specialist support iro
their particular disciplines. They are indicated in blue on the
transparencies.

4. Staff Organisations. The CSADF was assisted in his command function by
staff divisions each in respect of its own particular specialist
function. They are indicated in green on the transparencies. On SADF
headquarters level the Staff organisations performed certain limited
executive functions on behalf of the CSADF:

a. The Personnel Division was responsible for controlling the personnel
matters in the SADF.

b. The Intelligence Division was responsible for intelligence related
services in the SADF. It will be dealt with in more detail in paragraph 9.

c. The Operations Division was responsible for overall control and
co-ordination of operational planning in the SADF.

d. The Logistics Division was responsible for the overall control and
co-ordination of logistic planning and logistic support in the SADF.

e. The Finance Division was responsible for the overall control of
financial matters and the co-ordination of the budgeting process in the
SADF. It had no command function but exercised control over the Computer
Information Service in the SADF.

f. The Planning Division was responsible for strategic and long-term
planning in the SADF which covered aspects such as force development and
economic utilisation of resources within the context of the external
environment.

5. The Main Functions of the SADF

1. The mandate for the execution of the main functions of the SADF was
   derived from Sec 3(2) of the Defence Act, Act 44 of 1957, as amended.
   These functions entailed:


i. The employment of the SADForganisation or parts thereof

(1) on service in defence of the Republic;

(2) on service in the prevention or suppression of terrorism;

(3) on service in the prevention or suppression of internal disorder in
the Republic;

(4) on service in the conservation of lives, health or property or in the
maintenance of essential services.

ii. Service in pursuance of those police duties mentioned in Sec 5 of the
Police Act, 1959 (Act No 7 of 1959) as may be prescribed.

b. The execution of the services mentioned in the preceding sub-paragraph
was delegated to the Arms of the Service mentioned in paragraphs 6 to 8.

7. The Role, Functions and Organisation of the SA Army

a. The SA Army, commanded by the Chief of the Army (C Army), was
responsible for the national safety of the RSA and SWA within the Army
context with the following functions in mind.

i. Observing and evaluating the nature and extent of the threat as far as
the involvement of the SA Army is concerned. (The Army's own intelligence
function).

ii. Developing a credible deterrent capability to discourage landward
conventional onslaughts and insurgency. (Force development and training
functions).

iii. Providing the landward defence of the RSA.

iv. Engaging in the land battle in co-operation with other combat
services.

v. Preventing and suppressing internal unrest in support of the SA Police
and assisting them in maintaining law and order.

vii Providing emergency relief during disasters or emergencies and
maintaining essential services under such conditions where necessary.

b. The Army was organised along the same lines as the SADF at
headquarters level iro the staff divisions. (See Appendix B). The CArmy
commanded a vast force, consisting of full-time and part-time soldiers
organised into a conventional force for the landward defence of the
country, a territorially organised counterinsurgency force to support the
SA Police, a SWA Command with a SWA Territory Force for employment in SWA
and Southern Angola, as well as certain functional support commands and
training establishments.

c. The SA Army's policy on training required that all conventional forces
be double trained, i.e. in their conventional role as the primary
function consideration and in counterinsurgency as a secondary function.
This policy ensured that when there was a shortage of forces for
counterinsurgency tasks in support of the SAP, these primarily
conventionally trained troops could be and were employed, e.g.
maintaining law and order or on the prevention and suppression of
internal unrest. The shortages of troops resulted from the vast number of
troops that were required for operations in SWA and Angola especially in
the years from 1985 to 1989.

d. In respect of the organisation of the SA Army, the line of command ran
through each of the 10 territorial command headquarters, to a number of
group headquarters in each territorial command and then to the units. See
Appendix C for the organisation of Witwatersrand Command as an example of
a typical command.

6. The SA Air Force (SAAF)

a. The SAAF, organised as shown at Appendix D, had as its aim to provide
an air capability for attaining the security objectives of the RSA with
the following functions:

i. To secure a favourable air situation.

ii. To participate in the land battle.

iii. To patrol the RSA coastline in co-operation with the SA Navy.

iv. To provide air support to the SA Police when required.

v. To provide air support to other organisations during disasters and
emergencies.

vi. To participate in search and rescue operations when required.

b. The SAAF was commanded by the Chief of the Air Force (CAF) assisted by
a headquarters with similar staff divisions to the SADF. The SAAF was
organised into:

1. The Command Post at SAAF Headquarters. It controlled air operations
   in the main threat area, i.e. the RSA except the areas controlled by
   the two regional commands.


ii. Southern Air Command (Cape Town). It controlled operations in support
of the Navy in coastal waters and operations in the Eastern Province,
Southern and Western Cape.

iii. Western Air Command. It controlled all air operations in the old SWA
and Southern Angola in support of the SA Army, SWA Territory Force and
SAP.

iv. Air Logistic Command and Training Command. It controlled Air Logistic
support and Air Force Training.

v. Airspace Control Command. It controlled Air Defence and Air Traffic
Control in the main threat area.

vi. Tactical Support Command was responsible for ground support and
providing air base facilities when the Air Force was to operate from
airfields other than SAAF bases and where facilities did not exist.

8. The SA Navy (SAN)

a. The SAN, organised as shown at Appendix E, had as its aim to defend
the RSA against maritime threats and attacks, to support landward
operations and to assist in safeguarding the maritime assets. The main
functions of the SAN were:

i. Naval operations, either independently or in conjunction with the
other combat services.

ii. Counterinsurgency operations in the Naval areas in the Cape, Natal
and Walvis Bay.

iii. Relief during situations of distress as well as to assist in search
and rescue operations, when required.

b. The SAN was commanded by the Chief of the Navy (C Navy) assisted by a
headquarters with similar staff divisions to the SADF and was organised
as follows:

i. A Western Naval Command with its Headquarters in Simon's Town and with
under command bases, units and ships mainly in the Cape, but also further
afield in Walvis Bay and Saldanha.

ii. An Eastern Naval Command with its Headquarters in Durban with under
command bases and units in Natal, the Eastern Cape and Transvaal.

iii. Support units directly under command of Naval Headquarters situated
in the Cape and Durban.

9. The SA Medical Service (SAMS)

a. The SAMS, organised as shown at Appendix F, had as its aim the
provision of medical and related support to the SADF and other
organisations with the following functions:

i. To execute medical and related supporting operations.

ii. To render a military psychological service to the SADF.

iii. To undertake specified medical selection for the SADF.

iv. To provide medical supplies to the SADF and other prescribed
organisations.

b. The SAMS was commanded by the Surgeon General assisted by a similar
staff organisation in his headquarters to those of the other Arms of the
Service with the addition of a Chief of Medical Staff Professional
Services. The SAMS was organised as follows:

i. Divided into seven regional medical commands within the RSA
responsible for providing medical support to all other SADF units and
personnel in those regions.

ii. A SWA Medical Command to support the SADF and SWA TF units and
personnel in SWA and Southern Angola.

iii. A Medical Training Command.

iv. No 1 Military Hospital and 7 Medical Battalion Group directly under
SAMS HQ.

v. Nos 2 and 3 Military Hospitals and various other medical units and
establishments under command of the various regional headquarters.

10. Special Forces

a. It is an internationally accepted practice to have an organisation or
organisations in military forces which are capable of carrying out
special military tasks. These require such skills and are usually carried
out under such risky circumstances that normally trained soldiers, airmen
and sailors are not able to perform them. Such organisations, e.g. the
British Special Air Service and Special Boat Squad, Royal Marine
Commandos or United States Special Forces are generally known by the name
of Special Forces. The SADF also had such an organisation, known as such,
and commanded by the General Officer Commanding Special Forces (GOC Spec
Forces). See Appendix G for the organisation of Special Forces.

b. The GOC Spec Forces was assisted in his command function by a
headquarters similar to those already described. Special Forces was
organised as follows:

i. 1 Reconnaissance Regiment was an airborne (paratroop) special forces
regiment specialising in external landward actions mainly in the
conventional warfare role.

ii. 2 Reconnaissance Regiment, a Citizen Force (part-time) organisation,
did not operate as an independent unit. Members of this unit were
utilized individually as specialists to supplement other units.

iii. 4 Reconnaissance Regiment was a seaborne special forces regiment
specialising in seaborne operations.

iv. 5 Reconnaissance Regiment was a landward (also airborne) special
forces regiment. It specialised in counter-revolutionary warfare.

v. During 1985/86 the ANC changed its tactics by intensifying its
underground and unconventional methods both externally and internally, as
discussed in Part 2. This led the SADF to counter the changing threat and
establish a new subdivision of Special Forces called the Civil
Cooperation Bureau (CCB) in May 1986. Civilian and demilitarised
personnel from various sources were appointed under contract to form the
CCB. The CCB was investigated by the Harms Commission. No documentation
other than that contained in the records of the Harms Commission is
believed to exist. At the time of the drafting of this submission the
Harms Commission records were not available to the Nodal Point. It is
believed that they are available to the TRC. The TRC's attention is drawn
to the evidence pertaining to the mandate, composition and functions of
the CCB. CCB activities were terminated in April 1990 and the
organisation was finally closed in February 1994.

11. Intelligence Staff Division: Military Intelligence Division (MID)

a. MID was the intelligence staff component of the SADF and had as its
aim the provision of customised military intelligence services to enhance
effective decision making in support of the Department of Defence (DOD).
According to the White Papers of 1984 and 1990 the mission of MID was to
determine the nature, extent and time scale of the military threat
against the RSA.

b. The functions of the MID were to:

i. provide strategic military intelligence to the DOD and the National
Interpretation Branch of the SSC;

ii. provide counterintelligence to the DOD;

iii. coordinate, and in certain instances conduct, intelligence
operations for the SADF;

iv. collect intelligence covertly for the DOD, and

v. Military diplomacy.

c. The organisation of MID is shown in Appendix H. It is important to
note that:

i. Chief Directorate Intelligence Operations was responsible for special
intelligence projects. For more detail see Part 5. Remark. This chief
directorate was terminated in 1992.

ii. Directorate Covert Collection (DCC) was responsible for the
collection of military related information in a covert manner. Remark.
DCC collected information as requested by its clients and had no
executive power.

12. Participation in the National Joint Management System. The SADF
played an important part in the National Joint Management System on all
levels.

a. National Level. The Minister of Defence and CSADF served on the State
Security Council (SSC) and the CSADF on the Working Committee of the SSC.
Several SADF officers served on the Secretariat of the SSC while there
was a SADF representative on almost every functional inter-departmental
committee or working group.

b. Regional Level. In each of the regions in which a SA Army Command
Headquarters was situated, a Joint Management Centre was established and
the Army Commander served on the body, often as chairman. On the
subcommittees the SADF was represented by Staff Officers of the Command
Headquarters.

c. Local Level. Group commanders or senior unit commanders served on
Local Management Committees or Liaison Committees responsible for joint
planning iro local areas.

13. Joint Planning iro Independent States. Four Joint Management Boards
(JMB) iro the Independent States were established for coordinating
Security Management. They were established in :

a. Far North Command iro Venda.

b. North Western Command.

c. EP Command iro Transkei and Ciskei.

14. It must be stressed that assistance to the SA Police in the Internal
role was a secondary role of the SADF. During the same period, which is
being covered, the SADF was involved in operations in SWA and Southern
Angola, which was part of its primary role. It consumed a large portion
of the SADF's effort and much of the time of senior commanders.




===========================================================================


PART 4



DEFENCE STRATEGY, PLANNING AND AUTHORISATION



BACKGROUND

1. As explained in Part 1, the RSA Government's National Security
Strategy was based on the concepts of cooperative co-existence,
non-alignment, self-determination and self-sufficiency, deterrence,
cross-border operations, support to anti-Marxist resistance movements in
neighbouring states, counter-revolutionary movements and the maintenance
of law and order. The RSA Government made it clear that the RSA was not
pursuing a policy of aggression against any state or group of states, or
contemplating any territorial expansion, but that the RSA would defend
its people against any threat. In this regard the security forces should
have the means to preserve the highest democratic body, i.e. Parliament
and afford it an opportunity to bring about changes to the RSA's
political dispensation in an evolutionary way, so as to meet the
constitutional and cultural needs of its peoples. The SADF was
pre-eminently a peacekeeping task force, but owing to the perceived
threat and the increasing instability in Southern Africa, the SADF
strategy was directed at ensuring the security of the people of the RSA
by taking offensive pro-active steps.

SADF STRATEGY

2. SADF Strategy was based on the Defence Act, 1957 (Act 44 of 1957) and
strategic guidelines from the SSC. This strategy stated clearly that :

a. no component of the SADF strategy existed independently from the
national strategy or any other guidelines or commands of the State
Security Council. Components of the SADF strategy were established as a
result of a national strategy; and

b. if the SADF identified a need for a national strategy or guidelines,
the Chief of the SADF (CSADF) should take the matter up with the WG
(Working Group) and/or the SSC, or through the SADF representative on the
IDCs (Interdepartmental Committees), or CSADF should take the matter up
with the SSSC (Secretary of the SSC).

3. The RSA Government's policy guideline to the SADF was that the RSA's
national security interests should be furthered through a pro-active
posture. This strategy emphasized that the promotion, development and
maintenance of the national security interests of the RSA should be
achieved through military actions, primarily outside the borders of the
RSA.

4. The SADF Strategy made provision that the SADF must have the ability
to exercise the following actions :

a. In the SADF's Area of Responsibility the SADF must be in a position to

i. conduct conventional military operations;

1. conduct counterinsurgency operations;


iii. conduct intelligence;

iv. conduct strategic communication operations; and


v. support the SAP in maintaining law and order.

b. In the SADF Area of Influence the SADF must be in a position to conduct

i. restricted conventional operations in support of counterinsurgency
operations;

ii. special and retaliation operations;

iii. conventional pre-emptive operations;

iv. full-scale conventional operations, if necessary;


v. intelligence; and

vi. strategic communication operations.

1. In the SADF Area of Interest the SADF must be in a position to
   conduct intelligence; and if necessary also to


i. exercise special and retaliatory operations;

ii. exercise air and maritime reconnaissance;

iii. deploy ground forces (restricted), and

iv. render air and maritime support to friendly governments

5. The SADF Strategy also made provision for the conflict in
Namibia/Angola, but this will not be discussed in this submission.

THE STATE OF EMERGENCY

6. In July 1985 the RSA government felt compelled to declare a State of
Emergency in 36 magisterial districts in terms of the Public Safety Act
of 1953 and the security forces were given increased powers to deal with
the situation. Mr Botha said in his statement that it was the duty of the
state to ensure that a normal community life be re-established and that
the situation be normalised in such a way that the climate for continued
dialogue be ensured.

7. To cope with the unrest and the state of emergency, the powers of the
SADF in support of the SAP were extended in December 1985. The Government
Gazette stipulated that members of the SADF who were to be used in
connection with any police function would have the same duties as
conferred or imposed upon a member of the SAP.

8. In July 1986 a national state of emergency was declared, and which was
extended annually until 1989.

PLANNING

FORECAST OF OPERATIONS

9. One of the first SADF strategic documents was the Forecast of
Operations, approved by the Chief of the SADF in August 1980. This
document was updated annually. The Forecast of Operations included the
objectives and tasks set out in the National Strategy and the Strategy
for Southern Africa. It served as the point of departure for force design
and development and the operational planning of the SADF. It also
detailed the operational responsibilities of the Arms of the Service.

10. After 1980, the forecast document was followed by more specific
strategies and guidelines on the basis of the national directives. The
defence strategies were once again based on the total strategies cited
above. These documents were compiled by the staff of the Chief of the
SADF for approval by C SADF and were disseminated in the form of Military
Strategic Documents (MSDs). Each Arm of the Service within the SADF was
responsible for strategic planning and, after approval, for
implementation in accordance with that Service's role and functions.

SADF PLANNING PROCESS

11. The process through which a military plan is reached entails the
following steps:

a. Initiation of Planning for an Operation. The planning can be initiated
by the executor, or be given to him as an order. A study is done to
determine the necessity to carry out the operation.

b. The Formulation of a Feasibility Study/Broad Plan. The chief executor
makes an appreciation in which all relevant factors and restrictions are
evaluated in order to determine whether the envisaged operation is
feasible or not.

c. Approval in Principle of Envisaged Operation. The plan in broad
outline is presented to the relevant commander, who approves further
planning.

d. Operational Guidelines. This serves as a framework within which
further planning is done.

e. Coordinating Conferences. These conferences are held from time to time
in order to formulate the plan.

f. Approval of Final Plan. The final plan, including the support plans,
are presented to the relevant commander for approval.

g. Issue of Operational Orders/Instructions. Written Operational
Orders/Instructions are issued to all parties involved in the execution
of the operation.

h. Progress of Operations. Higher Headquarters are at all times to be
kept informed of the progress of all operations.

i. Debriefing. A debriefing is held after the conclusion of the operation.

AUTHORISATION FOR SECURITY ACTIONS

12. The role and functions of the SADF, are set out in section 3 of the
Defence Act, 1957, as amended, provided for the Defence Force to be
placed in service in defence of the RSA in the prevention or suppression
of terrorism; in the prevention or suppression of internal disorder in
the RSA and in the preservation of life, health or property; or the
maintenance of essential services. (For more detail see Part 3).

13. Specific authorisation for the conduct of security operations derived
from policies, strategies, directives, guidelines and instructions issued
at national and departmental level. Each Arm of the Service of the SADF
had specific responsibilities and authority, e.g.

a. the SA Army was responsible for the conduct of the land battle and
internal security operations in support of the SAP;

b. the SA Air Force was responsible for the air battle and internal
security operations in support of the Army and the SAP; and

c. the Navy was responsible for seaward defence.

14. Specific actions and operations were authorised in departmental
policies, strategies and directives.

15. The division of responsibility between the SADF and the SA Police
(SAP) for the conduct of internal operation, was set out in a policy
directive approved by the Prime Minister in December 1979 and amended
from time to time. Inside South Africa, the SAP had primary
responsibility for urban operations, while the SADF was responsible for
rural operations and border protection.

16. On the regional level, the responsibility and authority for the
conduct of operations was granted in specific command directives and
guidelines applicable to the territorial commands of the Army and
military units. This meant that regional commanders had authority and
responsibility for the conduct of military operations within their
regions, in accordance with approved defence policy, strategies and
directives.

INTERDEPARTMENTAL COORDINATION

17. The co-ordination of interdepartmental actions and operations at the
regional and local levels was effected through the National Security
Management System. This provided for numerous Joint Management Centres
(JMCs), made up of the senior representatives of the relevant departments
at those levels.

18. In the context of regional security, the JMCs were responsible for
ensuring stability and security in their areas and for normalising the
local situation. Authority and accountability were based on the line
functions of each department. (For more detail see Part 3).

OPERATIONS OUTSIDE THE BORDERS OF THE RSA

19. Authority for the conduct of operations outside the borders of the
RSA was contained in a directive approved by the SSC in 1979. These
guidelines were initially compiled to provide for operations in southern
Angola and were later amended to include other areas.

20. In essence, the directive limited the authority of the Chief of the
SADF to immediate hot pursuit (cross-border) operations, while the
Minister of Defence could approve reconnaissance into neighbouring areas.
The planning for all other military actions beyond the borders of the RSA
and SWA/Namibia had to be referred to the Chairman of the SSC for his
decision, in consultation with those members of the SSC he decided to
involve.




===========================================================================

PART 5


DEFENCE FORCE OPERATIONS


INTRODUCTION


1. As explained in the previous parts, and in accordance with the
National Security Strategy and the SA Defence Force Strategy the SADF
undertook several operations. (For the authorisation see Part 4). It
should be stressed that the list of operations, as set out in this
Section, may not be complete.


ARMY OPERATIONS

2. The SA Army became involved in combating internal unrest in the RSA on
a meaningful scale only during the early 1980s. This involvement
gradually escalated after serious unrest broke out in the Vaal triangle
during September 1984. The most important areas of deployment were the
Witwatersrand, Natal, the Eastern Cape and the townships in the Cape Town
area. Unrest in the Witwatersrand and Natal were further complicated by
the conflict between Inkatha and ANC-aligned organisations.

3. The SA Army rarely operated independently of the SA Police in the RSA
and then only in the self-governing national states - Lebowa, Gazankulu,
Kwazulu, Kwangane, Qwa-Qwa and Kwa Ndebele. All other SA Army actions
were undertaken in support of the SA Police. These consisted mainly of
roadblocks and cordon-and-search operations or the provision of reserve
forces. Most operations were ongoing and given the following code-names
which were changed from time to time:

a. Border Control

i. Operations PEBBLE and PORCELAIN - to protect all international borders;

ii. Operation INTEXO - to monitor the electric border control fence on
the RSA/Mozambique border; and

iii. Operation LONGLIFE - to assist the SA Police against cattle rustling
along the Mozambique border.

b. Internal Security

i. Operation XENON, REDEYE,TANTO and PAAL - to support the SA Police in
combating general unrest throughout the RSA;

ii. Operations EARDRUM, PHOENIX and PIKADEL - to support the SA Police in
combating internal unrest in specific areas of Natal, the Eastern Cape
and in the Witwatersrand respectively;

iii. Operations BUTTARD, HOPSCOTCH, SPIDER and ZIGZAG - to support the SA
Police in recovering illegal weapons and to combat gun-running especially
in Natal; and

iv. Operations CONTROL and NAIL - to deploy roadblocks by air in various
parts of the country in support of SA Police operations.

c. Self-governing States. Operations QUEST and WINDMEUL - to combat
unrest in support of the authorities of the self-governing states
mentioned in paragraph 3.

CHRONOLOGY OF OPERATIONS

4. The following chronology gives an indication of the types of
operations undertaken and of the number of Army troops deployed
internally from 1980 onwards:


SERIAL NO 
DATE 
ACTION

1 
Jun 1980 
1755 Men for roadblocks

2 
Jul 1980 
30 Men for cordon and search

3 
Aug 1980 
140 Men for roadblocks

4 
Jun - Dec 1980 
2050 Men per month for the protection of National Key Points (NKPs)
throughout the country

5 
20 Mar - 16 Apr 1981 
Approximately one brigade for cordon and search in Soweto.

6 
Mar - Jun 1981 
480 Men per month for cordon and search.

620 Men per month for roadblocks countrywide.

1060 Men per month for the protection of NKPs.

7 
25 Apr - 10 Mar 1981 
6 Companies for cordon and search in Soweto.

8 
15 May - 11 Jun 1981 
Cordon and search in Krugersdorp, Magaliesburg and the East Rand

9 
15/16 May 1981 
Cordon and search at Meadowlands Hostel

10 
17 May 1981 
Cordon operation at Mondeor

11 
27 May - Jun 1981 
Operations in support of SAP in Western Province Command, Witwatersrand
Command, Kimberley and Queenstown

12 
27 Jul - 5 Jul 1981 
Road movement by a squadron to NKP power stations in Eastern Transvaal

13 
30 Nov - 10 Dec 1981 
Road movement by a mechanized company to discourage ANC(MK) presence in
the Eastern Transvaal

14 
27 Jul 1984 
Operations to protect duty buses and buildings occupied by the SADF.

15 
3-5 Aug 1984 
Countrywide roadblocks

16 
16-17 Aug 1984 
Countrywide roadblocks to safeguard polling stations

17 
4 Sep 1984 
Approximately 700 troops made available to assist SAP in unrest control
in the Vaal triangle.

18 
13 Sep 1984 
Northern Transvaal Command issues instructions that duty bus sentries be
armed.

19 
19 Oct 1984 
SADF placed into service by Presidential order to combat unrest

20 
22 Oct 1984 
Operation PALMIET: Cordon and search by approximately 5000 troops in
Sebokeng and Boipatong

21 
3/4 Nov 1984 
Countrywide roadblocks in view of stay away-action on 5 and 6 Nov 1984

22 
13 Nov - 13 Des 1984 
Simultaneous countrywide action in support of SAP in townships.

23 
6-9 Jan 1985 
Countrywide roadblocks to address deteriorating internal situation,
especially in Eastern Cape

24 
16/17 Feb 1985 
Witwatersrand Command Reaction Force in support of SAP to recover arms in
Suurbekom

25 
22-28 Mar 1985 
SADF become involved on a large scale in support of SAP in combating
unrest, spreading to total areas. SADF formally ordered into service by
the Minister of Defence to combat unrest, and given additional powers
throughout RSA on 28 Mar

26 
18 Apr 1985 
Man shot and killed by Army patrol during unrest in Nyanga

27 
3/4 May 1985 
Cordon and search in Kwandabuhle, Eastern Province

28 
5 Sep 1985 
In terms of Operational Instruction 15/85, the SADF assumes
responsibility for border protection in Eastern Transvaal. (Army does
protection tasks and police policing)

29 
Aug 1985 
Operation PEBBLE: SADF assumes border control ops from SAP in Eastern
Transvaal. Remark. Operation PEBBLE was initiated in Eastern Transvaal
and expanded during 1985 to Transvaal, Northern Natal and Eastern Free
State along international borders.

30 
13 Oct 1985 
Army sergeant stabbed to death after giving chase to a rioter on the East
Rand

31 
Nov 1985 
Three MK cadres killed in follow -up after rocket attack on Secunda

32 
4 Dec 1985 
Driver of minibus wounded, captured and handed over to Police after he
threw a grenade at SA Army Buffel vehicle in Wit Command area

33 
31 Dec 1985 
Hitchhiker who threw stones at vehicles is shot through arm in
Witwatersrand area

34 
20 Jan 1986 
SA Army force levels increased after landmine incidents in Far Northern
Command

35 
31 Mar 1986 
Operation PEBBLE. 16 Companies deployed. Result of operation: 2615
Illegal immigrants arrested. Estimated to be only 20% of total number of
illegal entrants.

36 
16-18 Apr 1986 
Operation LUIS. Cordon and search in support of SA Police in Lamontville,
Chesterville and Kwa Mashu, Durban

37 
10/11 May 1986 
Cordon and search by SADF in support of SAP in Alexandra

38 
Jun/Jul 1986 
SA Army take over overall responsibility for border protection from SA
Police

39 
29 Jul 1986 
High density operation in Tembisa and Alexandra in support of SA Police

40 
Jul 1987 
Brigade deployed in Eastern Transvaal for almost three months in
stabilization role

41 
23 Mar 1989 
Operation SKAAP. SA Army actions in support of SA Police in Eastern
Transvaal against possible MK infiltrators from Swaziland

42 
24 Jul 1989 
SADF deployment in terms of National Joint Operation Centre's guidelines
for the curtailment of the Defiance Campaign's effort to disrupt the
election on 6 September . Operations include patrols, roadblocks and
cordon and searches

43 
31 Mar 1989 
Operation PEBBLE. Deployment N-Tvl - 5 Companies, Natal - 2 Companies, E
Tvl - 5 Companies, OFS - 1 Company, NW - 1 Platoon, N Cape - 1 Company.

Operation XENON Deployment. Between 25 and 52 Companies per month for the
year Apr 88 - Mar 89.

Operation WINDMEUL Deployment. (Lebowa, Kangwane and Kwandebele) - 7/8
Companies per month

44 
1-2 Feb 1990 
In Operational Instructions 1/90 and 2/90 the SADF was ordered to
withdraw from the townships in which it was deployed but be ready to
support the SA Police on request, if unrest were to break out after the
speech of the State President on 1 Feb and the release of Mr Mandela

45 
12-14 Mar 1990 
Show of force in Venda by 14 Ratel Infantry vehicles

46 
30 Mar 1990 
Army's border protection plan. First filter - the border fence. Second
Filter - patrols and roadblocks. Third filter - arrests inside country

47 
4 Apr 1990 
Operation EARDRUM: Natal Command plan to stabilize situation in Natal -
ongoing

48 
17/18 May 1990 
Cordon and search in Welkom

49 
22/23 May 1990 
Cordon and search in Welkom

50 
21 May 1990 
Operation PORCELAIN. Border control excluding Far Northern Command
Borders. Deployed - 3155. On Standby - 2576.

Operation QUEST. Stabilization in Self Governing areas. 1492 Deployed.

Operation EARDRUM. Stabilization in KwaZulu/Natal. 3105 Deployed.

Operation REDEYE. To support SA Police in curtailing unrest and terror
activities in urban areas.

Deployed - 1248. Standby - 4874.

TOTAL 10450 (Deployed - 9000. Standby 7450)

51 
1 Aug 1990 
Operation LONGHORN. Cordon and search in Sebokeng

52 
7 Dec 1990 
SA Army takes over search responsibility at certain border posts from SAP

53 
11 Mar 1991 
Patrols and cordon and search at the IFP hostel in Alexandra

54 
12 Mar 1991 
A suspect who escaped from SAP custody during a cordon in Witwatersrand
command area was shot and killed

55 
4/5 May 1991 
High-density operation in Alexandra and Soweto

56 
13-21 Jul 1991 
High-density operation near Richmond, Natal

57 
2 Jan 1992 
One person killed and two escaped during an incident at the Army base at
Zebedelia

58 
13-19 Mar 92 
Operation BUTTARD. Combined SAP/SADF operation to trace illegal weapons

59 
4 Sep - 15 Dec 1992 
Operation DIVER. Stabilization and support in Ciskei

60 
2-24 Oct 1992 
Operation HOPSCOTCH. Several high density operations in Natal to patrol
intensively, trace weapons and maintain a high profile

61 
1 Jul 1993 
SA Army places a cordon around the World Trade Centre. All demonstrations
to be contained

62 
5-8 Aug 1993 
Operation REGTER. Roadblocks and reaction force provided for SA Police
during AWB ceremony in Schweizer Reineke

63 
1 Sep 1993 
Operation BAKKOP. North Western Command Task Force deployed in support of
SAP at ceremony in Sannieshof

64 
15 Dec 1993 
Operation in support of SAP to search for weapon at Monatse pass

EXTERNAL OPERATIONS

5. The following external operations were carried out against ANC(MK) and
PAC (APLA) bases and facilities :

a. Mozambique : 30 January 1981. An attack on the ANC Headquarters in the
Matola area, Mozambique.

b. Lesotho : 9 December 1982 An attack on ANC facilities in Maseru,

Lesotho.

c. Mozambique : 17 October 1983. An attack on an ANC planning facility
close to the official residence of the President of Mozambique in Maputo.

d. Botswana : 14 June 1985. An attack on eight houses and two offices of
the ANC (Western Front) in Gaberone.

e. Botswana and Zimbabwe : 19 May 1986. Attacks on an ANC transit

facility and an operational centre in Gaberone; as well as an office

and a house used for transit purposes in Harare.

f. Botswana : 28 March 1988. An attack on an ANC transit facility in

Phiring, Gaberone.

g. Transkei : 17 October 1993. An attack on a PAC transit facility in
Umtata.


SA AIR FORCE (SAAF) OPERATIONS

6. Throughout the seventies and eighties, SAAF operations were carried
out on an ongoing basis. Operations carried out in support of and in
conjunction with, other arms of service or the Police are defined as
joint operations and those in which only the SAAF took part, as
autonomous operations.

7. The planning and execution of operations were decentralized at SAAF
Command level after authorization was obtained from SAAF Headquarters.
The threat situation within each Command determined the amount of air
support required and used. External operations were planned jointly
through the SADF's Operations Division and submitted for approval at the
appropriate level.


JOINT OPERATIONS

8. By the end of the 1980s, the deterioration of the security situation
called for a more structured, formalized reaction by the security forces
to counter threats. Extensive air support was provided for the following
operations :

a. Operation ACCLAIM. To assist the SA Police with crime prevention.

b. Operation ALWYN. To assist the SA Police to control the RSA/Lesotho
borders for crime prevention and stock theft.

c Operation VENTIC. To assist the SA Police in maintaining law and order
during mass action.

d. Operation HANDEVAT. To assist the SA Police in crime prevention.

e. Operation NOORDER. To assist the Department of Foreign Affairs and the
SA Navy in establishing a maritime border between the RSA and Mozambique.

f. Operation ROOIKAT. To provide air support for the Gazankulu and
Lebowapolice.

g. Operation JAMBU (Later YENLEY). Support for the Independent Election
Commission (IEC) during the run-up to the elections in 1994.

9. The following were joint operations where the SAAF played a key role:

a. Photo Reconnaissance (PR) sorties were continually flown (2-3 times
per week) over "informal" (squatter) settlement areas throughout the
country after influx control measures were scrapped.

b. A continuous programme of daylight visual reconnaissance flights,
using SA Police and Army observers to combat serious crime and SDU/SPU
activity in townships.

c. Specialist night reconnaissance sorties carrying SA Police and Army
observers to assist ground forces navigation in townships.

d. Night lunar operations with helicopters to combat SDU/SPU activity,
violence and crime.

e. Assistance in monitoring the progress and safety of the funeral
corteges of Chris Hani and Oliver Tambo.

f. Integrated operations using helicopters to transport ground forces
rapidly into areas to combat serious crime and unrest. This took place
continuously throughout 1993 and 1994 in townships in the Witwatersrand,
especially Katlehong and Thokoza.

g. Support to the Rapid Deployment Force deployed in the Witwatersrand
area in transporting mobile roadblocks to combat gun-running.

h. Use of C130s and Dakota transport aircraft as well as Oryx helicopters
to "show force" in Soweto, sealing off areas to permit the SA Police to
conduct search operations.

i. Reconnaissance flights in conjunction with SA Police and ESKOM to
combat the theft of copper wire from telephone lines.

j. Patrol flights along bus routes south of Johannesburg after school
children were shot at near Eikenhof.

k. Patrol flights along railway lines during peak periods after violence
and shooting increased on trains in the East and West Rand.

l. "Skyshout" and pamphlet-dropping flights were used to encourage people
to disregard the ANC's calls for boycotts and non-payment of services.

m. Helicopters were used to fly in and protect medical teams visiting
townships.

n. Reaction forces were flown in for surprise raids on hostels.

o. A Remotely Piloted Vehicle (RPV) was used to monitor election
procedures in the Witwatersrand area.

p. Temporary air control posts were deployed around the country to
coordinate air requirements to facilitate the elections. Voting
equipment, ballot papers and personnel were flown to crisis areas.


AUTONOMOUS AIR OPERATIONS

10. Autonomous air operations were carried out to combat particular
threats, using the distinct capabilities of the SAAF. These operations
were intelligence- gathering reconnaissance sorties. The exception to
this was Operation SKERWE - the reprisal attack into Matola - after the
explosion of the ANC bomb outside SAAF HQ in Pretoria. The following were
the main autonomous air operations conducted externally:

a. Mozambique : May 1983. A RPV was flown from Komatipoort over Maputo to
collect and update intelligence on ANC facilities there.

b. Mozambique : 23 May 1983. Operation SKERWE took place, using 12
Impalas and two Mirage F1 AZs, to attack known ANC facilities in the
Matola suburb of Maputo in retaliation for the car bomb detonation
outside Air Force Headquarters, Pretoria, on 20 May. Two ANC houses and a
headquarters were attacked.

c. Zambia and Botswana : 16-19 October 1984. A photo reconnaissance (PR)
mission was flown to cover areas in Zambia and Botswana where ANC
presence was suspected after the Mozambican government had ordered the
ANC to cease activities from Mozambique and withdraw to neighbouring
countries.

d. Mozambique/Swaziland/RSA borders : 8 May 1986. Photo reconnaissance of
the Mozambique/Swaziland/RSA borders was undertaken to develop
intelligence to combat gun-running and illegal border crossings between
Mozambique and the RSA.

e. Zambia : 19 May 1986. Operation LEO was launched by two Canberras and
five Mirage F1s against ANC targets at Makeni Plots, 15 km SW of Lusaka,
Zambia in retaliation for the sabotage on Sasol II and Secunda plants.

f. Botswana/RSA border areas : 18-20 July 1986. PR of certain
Botswana/RSA border areas, including the road from Nata to Kazangulu, in
order to combat infiltration by ANC cadres to the RSA.

g. Zimbabwe : 14 September 1986. Six aircraft were used to photograph
suspected ANC targets throughout Zimbabwe.

11. Conventional Special Operations. Conventional special operations are
covered under the SA Army operations.


SPECIAL PROJECTS

SUPPORT FOR ANTI-MARXIST LIBERATION MOVEMENTS

12. In Boek 1 (1980), chapter 5, the RSA Government accepted as
government policy enhance the image and posture of anti-Marxist
liberation movements in Southern Africa. This principle was reiterated in
the Nasionale Strewes en Beleidsgrondslae van die Republiek van
Suid-Afrika, 1987, the amended Strategy for Southern Africa (1 December
1986), and the Recommendations by the SSC dated 19 March 1984. This
principle was included in the SADF Strategy (1987).

13. Angola

a. The 1986/87 Strategy for Angola gave, inter alia, the following
guidelines: The SADF

i. could proceed with clandestine reconnaissance in Angola,

ii. should continue with military operations against SWAPO; and

iii. must support UNITA.

b. The support for UNITA was co-ordinated under the code name Operation
SILWER. With the signing of the New York Agreement, the support for UNITA
was restricted to humanitarian aid, verified by the RSA department of
Foreign Affairs and the UN.


14. Mozambique

a. The support of RENAMO was part of the RSA Security Strategy up to the
Nkomati Accord in 1983. After the signing of the accord, contact was
maintained with the RENAMO leadership in order to influence them to take
part in the peace process in Mozambique.

b. The Strategy for Mozambique made provision that the SADF :

i. could undertake military operations against ANC bases and facilities
and

ii. must ensure that the Mozambique Government honour the Nkomati Accord
wrt support for the ANC (MK).

c. Up to 1983 the support for RENAMO was coordinated under the code name
Operation PIKI.

15. Lesotho. The support for the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) was to
neutralise the threat or potential threat from Lesotho against the RSA.
Eventually the SADF played an active role in reconciling the conflict
between the political parties in Lesotho. To achieve this the SADF had to
separate the Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA-military wing of the BCP) from
the conflict in Lesotho. This project was known as Operation CAPSIZE and
was terminated in 1989.


16. Transkei/Ciskei. In 1984/85 the relationship between the Ciskei and
the Transkei reached an all time low. The RSA Government and the SADF
were very concerned about the situation and the spill-over effect it
could have on the Eastern Cape. In 1986 the SADF commander of the Eastern
Province Command made a suggestion to the Chief of the SA Army as to how
to stabilize and normalize the situation. This appreciation became known
as Operation KATZEN. The SADF started with the implementation of this
project, but in October 1987 the Minister of Defence instructed the CSADF
to terminate the project.


17. Inkatha. In 1985 Chief Minister Buthulezi requested paramilitary
support from the RSA Government. The RSA government decided on 20
December 1985 to grant him this support and tasked the SADF to render the
support. The project was known was Operation MARION.


STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION (STRATCOM)

18. Background. The mass mobilization for "People's War" and widespread
acts of violence was supported by a sophisticated domestic and
international propaganda campaign. In Boek 1 (1980 -Chapter 5) the RSA
government acknowledged the need for a similar strategy and the following
guidelines, inter alia, were formulated:

a. to discredit the terrorist organization in Southern Africa, as well as
the Cuban and other communist surrogate forces;

b. to neutralise the propaganda of the mass media inciting the RSA
population against the goals and aims of the RSA government in Southern
Africa; and

c. to enhance the posture and image of anti-Marxist Liberation Movements
in Southern Africa.

19. SSSC Guidelines. In a policy document of the Secretariat of the State
Security Council (SSSC), approved on 21 August 1986, the following
guidelines regarding Strategic Communication were set out:

a. Definition. STRATCOM is the planned, coordinated execution of an act
and/or the presentation of a message to :

i. create, maintain or change attitudes behaviour and ideologies; and to

ii. neutralise opposing propaganda.

b. Aims of STRATCOM. To

i. influence the internal population positively in respect of declared
national goals;

ii. influence the international community positively in respect of the
policies of the RSA; and

iii. neutralise/undermine enemy/opposing propaganda.

c. Overt STRATCOM. This comprises the functions of informing, enhancing
the image of, and monitoring State policies openly executed by
Departments. (Known in business terminology as marketing.)

d. Covert STRATCOM. In order to achieve the aims of STRATCOM, it is often
necessary to exercise a positive influence in such a way that the
involvement of the State is not apparent. It entails making use of
individuals and/or organisations which have no obvious ties with the
State, but are financially assisted by the State and act according to
agreed-upon programmes and guidelines emanating from approved strategies.

e. Execution of STRATCOM

i. Within the State Security System the Branch Strategic Communication
(BSC) of the SSSC is responsible for the co-ordination of STRATCOM and
for issuing overall policy to Departments, the Bureau for Information and
the Communication Committees (COMCOMS) of the Joint Management System
(JMS).

ii. The Bureau for Information is the primary line functionary with
respect to the marketing of national goals and co-ordination will be done
via an interdepartmental STRATCOM-committee under Chairmanship of the BSC.

iii. Departments must execute strategies and STRATCOM plans as
co-ordinated by the BSC. Departments are also responsible in their own
right for the marketing of their line functions.

20. SADF Responsibilities iro STRATCOM Projects. In the SSSC guideline
document, certain departments were responsible for covert STRATCOM
projects in specific fields. Those allocated to the SADF were:

a. Youth Clubs.

b. Community Organisations.

c. Women's organisations.

d. Traditional Authorities.

e. Arts.

f. Rural Development.

Within the SADF, the Military Intelligence Division (MID) and the SA Army
were responsible for covert STRATCOM projects. The Arms of the Service
were responsible for the motivation of own troops and SADF civic action.

21. SADF Covert STRATCOM Projects

a. MID was responsible for the

i. overall control, policy, monitoring and co-ordination of projects;

ii. management of certain STRATCOM projects; and

iii. international communication.

b. The SA Army was responsible for STRATCOM iro Own Forces, the
population and revolutionary forces fighting against the RSA.


22. SADF Civic Action

a. Continuous infiltrations by ANC (MK) and PAC (APLA) placed a strain on
administration in the rural areas and the SADF realized that, in order to
contain the revolutionary war, the support to the local population needed
to be improved and maintained. It was imperative that the administration
had to be seen to govern - a collapse of the administration would be
chaotic. Therefore the SADF embarked on a Civic Action programme aimed at
bolstering the administrative structures. Soldiers were deployed in
various disciplines to create a positive image amongst the RSA population
: eg

i. Education. National Servicemen (NSM) with educational qualifications
were deployed in support of the Departments of Education at, for example,
the the following schools: Fort Hare (Ciskei), Kwena Moloto College of
Education and the Seshego High School (Northern Transvaal).

ii. Medical. Medical orderlies formed part of patrols and provided basic
medical care. Military doctors were deployed at hospitals, eg Shongwe
Hospital (Eastern Transvaal), Helena Franz Hospital (Northern Transvaal),
Jozini and Umlazi (Natal) and Mdantsane (Ciskei).

iii. Veterinary Services. Veterinary Surgeons were available at military
bases and were also detached to provincial governments.

iii. Agricultural. In the Northern Transvaal, approximately 30 NSM were
detached to the Department of Agriculture to assist with agricultural
training.

iv. Water Supply. NSM were detached to the Department of Water Affairs to
assist with projects iro water provision. In the area of Natal Command,
up to 58 emergency water points were manned on a daily basis.

b. At the same time Own Forces were trained in the need to win the
"Hearts and Minds" of the people. Patrols made contact with the rural
population and assisted them in numerous ways such as repairing
windmills/water holes, minor repairs to schools, low-key medical
assistance, etc. Added to this, civilian victims of the war, for instance
those injured by land mines, were evacuated, often by helicopter, to
State hospitals.

KHAN COMMISSION

23. In August 1991 the State President appointed a committee, known as
the Khan Advisory Committee on Special Secret Projects. On the
recommendation of the committee certain secret projects were terminated
in 1991. In 1993 the rest of the secret projects were terminated when Sub
Division Intelligence Operations at MID was dismantled. As far as could
be ascertained, the relevant documentation, apart from the documents
submitted to the Khan Committee, was disposed of in accordance with
existing regulations. At the time of the drafting of this submission
there was therefore no documents on project detail available to the Nodal
Point. It is believed that the Khan Commission documentation is at the
disposal of the TRC.






===========================================================================

PART 6

CONCLUSION

1. In conclusion the Nodal Point wishes to emphasise two aspects:

a. The first is an observation made by members of the Nodal Point during
the research of documentation and interviews with ex-members of the SADF
while compiling this presentation. Although we cannot speak on behalf of
the old SADF, it became abundantly clear that there is a deep regret for
the death, pain and suffering that was caused on all sides by the
conflict of the past and also a firm resolve to contribute to a better
future for all. The saying that people who know war, those who have
experienced it, are the most earnest advocates of peace was clearly
demonstrated during these interviews.

b. The second aspect is that answers to questions of what happened in the
past are not readily available in files and documentation at the press of
a button. Information is spread over the country at the different levels
of command (as I have tried to explain to you in the presentation), in
archives and in people's minds. The Nodal Point therefore wants to
reiterate its offer which I mentioned in the opening remarks of this
presentation. We are a facilitating body at the service of the TRC and
will do our utmost to ensure access to the information needed to carry
out your mandate.

I thank you.
