


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 	 11 JUNE 1997 	

NAME: 	 ULRICH SCHELHASE

HELD AT: KTC, CAPE TOWN

DAY 2

________________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Dr Ramashala is going to lead Mr Schelhase and I will ask
Mrs Mary Burton to swear you in. Thank you Mary.

MS BURTON: Good morning Mr Schelhase.

ULRICH SCHELHASE: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Dr Ramashala.

DR RAMASHALA: Mr Schelhase, good morning.

MR SCHELHASE: Good morning.

DR RAMASHALA: May I first start by asking you when you first got involved
in Black areas in the area?

MR SCHELHASE: Madam I joined the then Administration Boards which became
the Development Boards in 1974 where I started as a clerk in the rental
office in Langa. And from then on I was promoted and was in charge of,
like a chief superintendent of township administration and housing of
Langa, Guguletu, Nyanga, Crossroads and later Khayalitsha.

DR RAMASHALA: Could you state what your position was, what your
responsibilities were particularly to the period of 1985/1986?

MR SCHELHASE: Madam in 1986 in the beginning, I think it was in April,
probably March, the Development Boards were abolished and we became
personnel of the Provincial Administration and the Provincial
Administration asked me to take specific care of the Crossroads
development situation and I was seconded as a town clerk for Crossroads.

DR RAMASHALA: So in fact during the first attack you were already in the
area?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Madam.

DR RAMASHALA: Is it correct for me to assume that you clearly came to
know the physical areas and the people in the areas very well?

MR SCHELHASE: I do Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: In that case you would have been consulted by people such
as security force members, security branch members etc, for guidance on
the dynamics of areas as well as the personalities in the areas?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

DR RAMASHALA: You indicated in one of your interviews that you would
identify individuals to the security forces as potential allies and
informers?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

DR RAMASHALA: Could you tell us a little bit about that, how you did
that, where you got your recommendations for informers, I mean which
groups did you tap?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes I will be a little bit more cautious about the term
"informers", but be that as it may. It was part of my duties to
understand the type of community in which I work because to make
decisions in an environment which you don't understand it is imperative
that you go to the trouble to learn to understand and in the process
...(intervention)

CHAIRPERSON: Excuse me Mr Schelhase - could you please be quiet Ladies
and Gentlemen, it's very difficult to hear Mr Schelhase. Thank you.

MR SCHELHASE: And in the process of learning to know the environment it
is obvious that you have to know the people who live in the environment
and it was very important for me to know who the leaders in the
communities were in order for me to do my job properly.

	To come back to your question Madam, if I was visited by members of the
security forces or the police and they asked me who I would recommend
that they can talk to about the security situation, whatever reason they
are there for I would refer them to the people that I understand are the
leaders of the community.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir, how did you come to find out about who were the
leaders of the communities?

MR SCHELHASE: By moving amongst people and of course receiving
representations from those leaders on behalf of the community.
Presentations in the sense where the community needs something, they
would come to me because I am the town clerk, or at the time the
superintendent of the township.

DR RAMASHALA: Is it correct then to say that because there was so much
tension in the area that you yourself had your own - you don't want to
use the word "informer" but I am going to use the wording, that you also
had your own system of ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Obviously, yes. If I can just perhaps - I don't want to
elaborate too much but I had more than 400 people at the time who worked
in my administration and of course we are in daily contact and these
people tell me what happens in the community.

DR RAMASHALA: Clearly the information that you got from some 400 people
would either be biased against one group or the other?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes obviously.

DR RAMASHALA: I'll come back to that question a little later, but my
other question is, could you please describe your participation in the
Joint Management Centre structures of the Western Cape? And I am not
trying to get you to go back to the past, but during the periods
preceding the conflict.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes. I was asked by the military personnel to serve on what
they called a Social Economic and Welfare Committee as a substructure of
the JMC system. They call it a min-JMC and it was conducted from my
office in Crossroads. I was the chairman of that committee who had to
deal with the socio-economic matters relating to Crossroads.

DR RAMASHALA: In that context Sir, to whom did you report?

MR SCHELHASE: Depending on the type of decisions that were made, but
there were minutes kept at those meetings and those minutes were then,
and the decisions that were taken, were then processed to the JMC, either
in the Castle or whether it is in Thomas Boydell building or whatever,
where it belonged.

DR RAMASHALA: It has already been reported to us that Mr Ngxobongwana,
who was part of the leadership or perhaps the leadership in Crossroads
belonged to the UDF and that during this period he broke ties with the
UDF, that is 1985. He broke ties with the UDF. Could you briefly describe
your understanding, what you think happened?

	I am asking this question with the assumption that you and Mr
Ngxobongwana had a good relationship.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Okay. Would you then say what happened.

MR SCHELHASE: As far as I know Madam that Mr Ngxobongwana is not an easy
man to understand, for the simple reason that he has always wanted to be
his own man. And I think that he has heeded the advice of Machiavelli,
which boils down to the point that do not align yourself with princes
stronger than you because you will not become the partner but their
captive. And I think that was, to put it in a particular context, I think
that was his motivation that he had the impression that the Crossroads
issue was fought against the Koornhofs and the systems of the time on his
and his community's behalf, and that he was feeling very uncomfortable
that people from other areas had to dictate to him how he should conduct
himself in the future about the future of that area. I think that was in
a nutshell his mindset as I understood it during the time.

DR RAMASHALA: During that period you knew that Mr Ngxobongwana was in
contact, for example, with security forces, special branch, riot unit
members such as Barnard, Dolf Odendaal as well as the South African Army,
Western Province Command Group 40, you were aware that he was in close
contact with those groups?

MR SCHELHASE: It is perhaps what I have heard Madam but I have not been
with Mr Ngxobongwana at that time in the presence with police or military.

DR RAMASHALA: So you are not aware of his relationship ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: I was aware of what other people told me and what I've
heard, but I mean I was personally not part of discussions they could
have.

DR RAMASHALA: In your relationship with Mr Ngxobongwana he never these
liaisons to you?

MR SCHELHASE: It may have been Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: He may have mentioned it?

MR SCHELHASE: Ja he may have, I do not deny that but it may have been.

DR RAMASHALA: Would you say that it was in the interests of the
Development Board for the attack on the satellite camps to occur?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Would you also say that it was in the interest of the
security forces for these attacks to take place?

MR SCHELHASE: I don't know Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Well you are aware that the security forces wanted to rid
the place of what they called comrades?

MR SCHELHASE: I assume so.

DR RAMASHALA: And so it was important for them to isolate the existence
of comrades in these areas and get rid of them?

MR SCHELHASE: One can make that inference Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: It is our understanding that you were part of a visit to Mr
Ngxobongwana in King Williamstown specifically, just prior to the attack
on KTC, is that correct?

MR SCHELHASE: No Ma'am it's incorrect. In the first instance I have
visited Mr Ngxobongwana, together with Mr Graham Lawrence who was also
one of our officials and we went to see Mr Ngxobongwana in East London at
the Kings Hotel.

DR RAMASHALA: What was the goal of that visit?

MR SCHELHASE: The goal, the aim of the mission was to ask Mr Ngxobongwana
to return to Crossroads because matters are out of hand and we are of the
opinion that at the time it was necessary for him to be there and to make
decisions and to enter into negotiations, which in fact has led to a
meeting subsequently with Archbishop Tutu in St Georges Cathedral.

	I must just add that the evening, and it was dusk I remember very well,
when Graham Lawrence and I flew over KTC to land at the DF Malan airport
at the time that KTC was already burning.

DR RAMASHALA: As leader of the Crossroads factions, let me just say the
Witdoeke, Mr Ngxobongwana had a way of disappearing just before an
attack, the first time he went to Rustenburg ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Excuse me Ma'am?

DR RAMASHALA: Mr Ngxobongwana had a way of disappearing just before an
attack.

MR SCHELHASE: I have asked him about this because it is not something new
to me and his excuse or his reason was always that the people are sending
him away. It is on the request of his community that he leaves.

DR RAMASHALA: Okay. Your information actually confirms what Mr Ndima said
yesterday.

	Who arranged the visits to Mr Ngxobongwana?

MR SCHELHASE: It was an idea that came out of discussions between myself
and Graham Lawrence and we have approached the JMC, the military
authorities to ask to arrange a flight for us.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir would you refer to a document, at the top it says
LI916, it's termed Secretariat of the State Security Council and it has
"TOP SECRET" on it.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Was this visit a JMC authorised visit?

MR SCHELHASE: A JMC authorised visit?

DR RAMASHALA: H'n.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Why would this request have been sent to the Secretariat of
the State Security Council? May I say one of the highest security bodies
of the State.

MR SCHELHASE: I wouldn't know Ma'am. I could only assume that it was
because to get authority for a private aircraft but I wouldn't know
otherwise.

DR RAMASHALA: Does this to you not indicate that the State Security
Council secretariat was being kept abreast of developments among the
Witdoeke ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Obviously.

DR RAMASHALA: Obviously, okay. Let me go back to the issue of your
responsibilities. Is it correct for me to say that you had a passion for
Crossroads?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: And that in fact you wanted Crossroads to be developed?

MR SCHELHASE: Absolutely.

DR RAMASHALA: And that in fact you would not have opposed any actions
that might have facilitated your agenda to clear the problem areas around
Crossroads to enable you to develop it?

MR SCHELHASE: I would not.

DR RAMASHALA: May I say then Sir that your interests, the interests of
the security forces and the interests of the Witdoeke verged in a sense?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes, yes.

DR RAMASHALA: And that all three groups would have done anything to make
sure that the strategies you engage in facilitated the process. For you
the process would be development.

MR SCHELHASE: One could say that.

DR RAMASHALA: For the security forces their goal would be to clear the
area of comrades and for the Witdoeke to get rid of the UDF related
allies etc?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: It is therefore not surprising, Sir, or let me raise that,
is it therefore not surprising Sir that the reports that have been given
that when the Witdoeke in numbers gathered around the Development
building that in fact casspirs or security forces were there accompanying
the Witdoeke to make sure that they proceed from one area of destruction
to another?

MR SCHELHASE: It could probably be Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir are you not curious that in fact the police, security
forces and perhaps your department could have prevented these attacks?
Acknowledging that your interests, all of your interests converge around
getting rid of these issues that prevent you from developing the area.

MR SCHELHASE: Madam we did not go to too much trouble to try and prevent
it.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir there is also a particularly interesting strategy that
was used in order to ensure that there was cooperation from those
communities that have been identified as "not supporting violence", is
that correct?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Is that strategy called McEwan Oil Spot Strategy, or are
these two different things?

MR SCHELHASE: Well the Oil Spot is only one notion within the whole
strategy.

DR RAMASHALA: Okay.

MR SCHELHASE: But the McEwan strategy was actually based on the work that
was published by an American Marine Colonel, called Colonel John J McEwan
and he has made a study of revolutions and counter-revolutions all over
the world, and that he has set up theoretical guidelines for a State or a
government to handle revolutionary situations.

DR RAMASHALA: As part of that question Sir, did the Development Board
provide any support , logistical, financial etc to the Witdoeke or its
leadership prior to the attacks? Now I am not talking about the welfare
type things that were referred to in the past.

MR SCHELHASE: Madam prior to 1986 I was not aware that there was anything
called the Witdoeke. To me that was something that was born out of the
conflict by men fighting each other and one faction identifying itself by
wearing white armbands or legbands or headbands against the other
opposition which did not have that as a means of identification.

	Prior to the attacks it was my job to provide services to all and
everybody in Crossroads, whether they were so-called Witdoeke or whether
they were so-called satellite camp leaders, but we had to give to
everybody what we could in Crossroads.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir I'd like to refer you to a document, also with a stamp,
Secretariat of the State Security Council. It is WPGBS/22/7/2. Now I
can't speak Afrikaans but ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: I can help you.

DR RAMASHALA: Okay. I'd like to refer you to paragraph 9 of the document.
Would you please read that for us please?

MR SCHELHASE: Paragraph 9 reads,

		"Brigadier de Jager is of the opinion that the older people, the
actions of the older people against the comrades necessitates support,
although it is on a covert manner. He will mention this to the
Development Board so that they can convey the possibility of support to
the Fathers. COMCOM is also requested to investigate whether the image of
the old people could be established".

And then on your right-hand side there is probably an instruction
identification, "Mr Land", which I remember was from the Bureau of
Information and Mr de Jong who was at (...indistinct) Bezuidenhout's
office, Chief Commissioner.

DR RAMASHALA: No Sir I am fully aware that you were not listed on that
document, but I'd like to get the benefit of your thinking about what
paragraph 9 that you've just read really suggests.

MR SCHELHASE: What it suggests?

DR RAMASHALA: H'n.

MR SCHELHASE: What it actually says is that a military officer was of the
opinion that the older people in Crossroads against the comrades enjoys
support, whether it happens in a covert manner or a covered-up manner and
that Mr de Jong must undertake to bring this to the attention of the
Development Board so that they can investigate the possibilities of
supporting the Fathers.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir there had already been conflict when this document was
issued.

MR SCHELHASE: It was dated in February 1986.

DR RAMASHALA: Yes.

MR SCHELHASE: I would assume so, yes.

DR RAMASHALA: Suggesting therefore that there should be continued
support. Now you say you didn't know about the term Witdoeke but you are
aware of the term Father, Fathers?

MR SCHELHASE: There are many various references, yes, but I think the
term Fathers, which was also asked of the previous witness was more like
a military reference. It was more the military people who referred to the
Fathers and some referred to the conservatives and there were various
descriptions of a faction or a mindset within the community.

DR RAMASHALA: Am I correct then in assuming that you knew that the
Fathers were really pro-Ngxobongwana group?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am. I think, sorry Ma'am, that that Fathers thing is
probably something that was an offspring of the 1976 situation, and that
it was just continued as a father/youth issue.

DR RAMASHALA: Were you, or anyone else in the Development Board ever
approached for the support mentioned in this document between January and
June 1986?

MR SCHELHASE: Not in terms of this document ...(intervention)

DR RAMASHALA: But in other ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: I mean not formally, in terms of what this document has
decided, but from other sources of course yes, yes.

DR RAMASHALA: But you were approached?

MR SCHELHASE: Ja.

DR RAMASHALA: What kind of support, can you say exactly what kind of
support we are talking about?

MR SCHELHASE: You see Ma'am all our operations in terms of management,
administration etc, had to be moulded within the McEwan strategy. It was
a direction. It was a model in which we had to operate. And if the model
dictates that we have to reward people, communities or sections of
communities that are non-violent, that collaborate with the system, then
that section or that community, their needs must be answered to. If they
have got specific needs we must provide those needs. That was one of the
pillars of the Oil Spot Strategy.

DR RAMASHALA: In fact this was a kind of a sweetheart deal.

MR SCHELHASE: Of course.

DR RAMASHALA: Very positive toward the so-called Witdoeke.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: Would you say that this attitude was shared in all
structures of the JMC as well as the Development Board?

MR SCHELHASE: Can you just repeat the first part?

DR RAMASHALA: Would you say that this attitude, the sweetheart deal
attitude was shared with all structures of the Joint Management Centres?

MR SCHELHASE: Of course Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: I want to go back to this fascinating Oil Spot Strategy.
You were actually considered the administrative expert on the Oil Spot
Strategy, theoretically.

MR SCHELHASE: Well in capital letters or not.

DR RAMASHALA: Theoretically.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

DR RAMASHALA: Would you explain it to us please?

MR SCHELHASE: Well I was in the ideal situation where Crossroads had a
fight, matters changed, things changed to the extent that it became a
more admin friendly community. The people, and especially White people
who were wary in the past to move around in the areas were now free to
walk around. We could work in the area, we could bring building
contractors in, which was different from a few months before.

	So that in essence Ma'am, is what an Oil Spot situation is in practice,
that you have pacified - a place or an area has been pacified which now
opens opportunities for development and the spin-offs from that
development may wash over to other communities who can see that there are
benefits if this and this and this happens. I mean if there's benefits,
if they are non-violent there is benefits, if they are prepared to
negotiate their problems whatever the nature of the situation was.

DR RAMASHALA: There's also benefits if one give out information.

MR SCHELHASE: Of course.

DR RAMASHALA: In implementing the Oil Spot strategy a number of people
were involved. I'd like to name a few and I'd like you to give me a
profile of what you think of them. One of them is Odendaal, I believe
Dolf Odendaal.

MR SCHELHASE: I know Dolf Odendaal. I don't know him personally very well
but in a professional situation I came to know him, yes. Are you asking
me what I think of him?

DR RAMASHALA: Ja.

MR SCHELHASE: I think he was a good policeman, and I think he was a very
courageous and a brave man.

DR RAMASHALA: What does courageous and brave mean?

MR SCHELHASE: It means that if you have to ...(intervention)

DR RAMASHALA: Kill ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: No, no, no Ma'am, if you have to encounter a situation
where you are actually with very few or very little support and you have
to resolve that situation basically on your own steam.

	And why I say that is that I can refer to a situation in Crossroads, I
don't know whether it's 1984, or even before that still, where Mr
Odendaal has walked man alone into a very aggressive crowd that was
protecting somebody and it was Mr Odendaal's business, I don't know
whether he had to arrest him or what, but it was an aggressive crowd and
he walked right into that crowd, and that is why I substantiate what I
say that he was courageous, in my eyes, in my terms.

DR RAMASHALA: Mr Barnard?

MR SCHELHASE: Barnard I didn't know very well. He had some tea with me
now and again, probably three or four times, but I didn't know him well
because he wasn't a man that was seen by us very often. So I wouldn't say
that, he was probably a roughneck obviously, looking at his background
history and his track record.

DR RAMASHALA: Mr du Toit?

MR SCHELHASE: Mr Flip du Toit. I have a very big respect for him Ma'am,
as a policeman. That he was a man that never carried a firearm and he was
very gentle with the people.

DR RAMASHALA: Finally, Mr MacMaster?

MR SCHELHASE: I don't know him at all.

DR RAMASHALA: The Oil Spot Strategy involved rewarding people, not solely
based on monetary aspects, but included rewards in a variety of ways?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: But in fact you rewarded Mr Ngxobongwana quite a bit?

MR SCHELHASE: I rewarded him.

DR RAMASHALA: In different ways, yes.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes, I was instrumental primarily in developing his
community by building creches and markets and houses and schools. And
whatever is in that township today is what I brought there.

DR RAMASHALA: And the more you rewarded the more people felt that their
needs were taken care of and the more they were willing to give you
information about so-called comrades.

MR SCHELHASE: No it wasn't my function to gather information on behalf of
the security forces or the police.

It wasn't my style and I wasn't interested in it as a matter of fact.

DR RAMASHALA: I want to just read a few things that we've gathered in our
information and get your opinion on that. Okay this was from an
interview, not a recorded interview, so I don't hold you on it.

		"Mr Barnard was a brutal killer. He was a shooter, a stealthy operator,
not like an SB using electric shocks, not that kind of brutal, he was the
nice guy, cold, smiling killer".

Do you agree with that?

MR SCHELHASE: I will agree with that, not as I - in terms of his
reputation, yes.

DR RAMASHALA: I want to read you another one.

		"The SAP's were Rambos...."

(break in transmission....)

MR SCHELHASE: Stone-throwers and people who burnt trucks, and that was
what I think was his job. In the process he did it in the way that he
thought was the best under the circumstances.

DR RAMASHALA: 	"And his primary goal was to get rid of comrades in the
area".

MR SCHELHASE: I would not say that I agree but I understand that it was.

CHAIRPERSON: Who was Mr Barnard's immediate senior?

MR SCHELHASE: I don't know Ma'am. I don't know in which division or which
section he worked. As I understand he was also operating like a loner guy
...(intervention)

CHAIRPERSON: A loner?

MR SCHELHASE: Like a loner, I don't know under which command he stood, in
which division he was ...(intervention)

CHAIRPERSON: And what department - was he from the Riot Squad units, was
he from ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: I couldn't figure where he was involved in, under what
command structure he was. It could be the Riot Squad I don't know. As I
said I didn't have much dealings with him.

CHAIRPERSON: Dr Ramashala.

DR RAMASHALA: I was still reading the names of the Rambo group. Battering
rams you referred to them, MacMaster, Johan Kleyn, Dolf Odendaal, Charles
Brezell(?) who incidentally had a Masters in psychology, .....Brezell,
and you say that there was a mindset with these guys, terrorists who will
butcher and slaughter, all boys network.

MR SCHELHASE: That was very emotional and heavy words Ma'am but I do not
deny that I said it.

CHAIRPERSON: Do any of the panel want to ask a question? Maybe while
people are thinking around some of the things you've told us, I would
just like you to unpack for us this Oil Spot Strategy a bit, just to see
it in total context. Who were the structures involved in this -
Crossroads obviously was the identified Oil Spot and who were structures?
You were one of the people, structures, your authority or committee, or
social welfare, who were the other bodies that were linking up to make
this strategy you've described to us successful?

MR SCHELHASE: Madam the Oil Spot Strategy has to be - the identification
of an Oil Spot has to be supported financially in order to make it work.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes, so who were the bodies?

MR SCHELHASE: So within the context of Oil Spot decisions or resolutions
which were made at the JMC the request for financing this reward system
would go through the JMC to the various departments, whether it's to the
State Security Council or whether it's to a department head of some
national government department, that's incidental, depending on the
nature of what must be supplied and what must be rewarded.

CHAIRPERSON: I'd like us to talk about specifics in relation to
Crossroads, not about incidentals.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Who were the structures, what were the structures involved
in this particular instance?

MR SCHELHASE: Madam it's all-encompassing. Let me give you a practical
example. If the need came forward from the community that they need a
primary school urgently obviously the JMC system will discuss the merits
of the situation and they would call in the old Department of Education
and Training people, the school planners, and they will present them with
the need and whether there is money involved, either the DET would
provide it itself, if they did not they could go to other sources,
through the JMC, that's more-or-less ...(intervention)

CHAIRPERSON: Right, no I understand. In other words to make this strategy
work, to win the minds and hearts of the people of Crossroads, the
approach had to be supported right up to the ministerial level?

MR SCHELHASE: Absolutely.

CHAIRPERSON: And so including, I mean now flowing down from the
ministerial level, there were other issues that were important, that were
problematic in the area of Crossroads, issues that related to the
political conflict for example. So at that level of the political
conflict you would have had to have a link somewhere to security officers
to deal with that particular issue?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: So the security department as well was involved in the - was
one of the structures that was involved?

MR SCHELHASE: Ja, they had to because they had to support it, I mean it
would have been counter-productive if we, from a socio-economic arm or
leg of the body would now work against the recommendations of the
security forces. So I mean it had to be a unity of effort. Everybody had
to agree that this was as it should be.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes it is very clear. In other words, just finally, in other
words because you had already identified the group of people, the
community that was sympathetic to the ideology, the government ideology
of the time, or that was supportive, that those people that you supported
obviously you had to have a group of people who support the government,
who are perceived somehow to be amenable to supporting the government. So
you identify those people, you are developing that group, that community.
So the reverse of that, of course, is that any effort to destroy or to
stamp out opposition to this group would be supported by all these
government structures, from the ministerial level down to the security
department, to yourself and to the roughnecks like Barnard.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: So in other words, the working of this entire project was
really in the hands or in the terrain of this strategy?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

CHAIRPERSON: And so we could conclude that therefore that strategy helped
the instability in the area at the time?

MR SCHELHASE: It was not perhaps intended but the negative aspects of it,
yes, I will agree.

CHAIRPERSON: Dr Ramashala.

DR RAMASHALA: So when you went to East London to visit Mr Ngxobongwana
was Mr Sam Ndima with you?

MR SCHELHASE: Ma'am if I can remember correctly it was myself and Graham
Lawrence and I think Prince Ngobincqwa who flew with the aircraft whilst
other men from Crossroads, and I think Mr Ndima was there along, went by
road and we met them in East London.

DR RAMASHALA: In fact Mr Ndima says that the purpose of the visit was to
warn Mr Ngxobongwana not to come back because they were preparing for an
attack.

MR SCHELHASE: No, that is maybe his interpretation, it was not my aim of
the mission.

DR RAMASHALA: Could you repeat again what the purpose of your mission
was, specifically?

MR SCHELHASE: It was important for us, when I say us, the people who
worked with me, that Mr Ngxobongwana had to come back as soon as possible
because the matter was getting out of hand. The whole of Lansdowne Road
and Klipfontein Road was no-go areas and we were suffering there because
nothing could be delivered in the area and it was important for him, as
we saw it at the time, that he must come back and instil some discipline
into the situation and take control of the situation. That is why we
persuaded or tried to persuade him to come back.

DR RAMASHALA: It's confusing to me. Sam Ndima said it was going to be a
particularly dangerous period, and yet you wanted Ngxobongwana to come
back. What is it that Ngxobongwana was going to do that the police and
the security forces couldn't do?

MR SCHELHASE: Madam there was - it came to our notice that there was a
coup de'tat planned against Mr Ngxobongwana ...(intervention)

DR RAMASHALA: By whom?

MR SCHELHASE: By Mr Prince Ngobincqwa and it was important because then
the violence would most probably be totally uncontrollable, it was
uncontrollable as it was. And we specifically took Mr Ngobincqwa with us
and I was, in a sense, embarrassed, because afterwards Mr Ngxobongwana
said to me that I should ignore that person and I should not help him or
work with him in any way.

	So that was actually why strategically I deemed it important that Mr
Ngobincqwa went along and that he should get the message that not to try
any tricks in Crossroads because it's going to worsen the situation. And
Mr Ngxobongwana must come back and face the music.

DR RAMASHALA: And were you present in the conversation between Mr
Ngobincqwa and Mr Ngxobongwana?

MR SCHELHASE: No Ma'am, I and Mr Lawrence personally have spoken to Mr
Ngxobongwana and then there was a big meeting which we excused ourselves,
and in any event the people spoke in Xhosa, so we left. We went for lunch
or something, I can't remember.

DR RAMASHALA: What is very confusing to me is that you knew that Prince
Ngobincqwa was planning a coup ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Well that was what we thought at the time.

DR RAMASHALA: And yet you took him to ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Yes it was part of the strategy. If it was so he had to
tell whether he wanted to do it or - I mean it was part of the revelation
of the situation, of the - to bring these parties together and listen to
what Mr Ngobincqwa's assessment was in the presence of Mr Ngxobongwana.

DR RAMASHALA: But, but then you leave when Mr Ngxobongwana and Mr
Ngobincqwa are talking ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: With others, yes.

DR RAMASHALA: But wasn't that information important to you. You say you
wanted to expose Mr Ngobincqwa to Mr Ngxobongwana but you leave at that
crucial moment?

MR SCHELHASE: Because I didn't think that it was my business Ma'am to get
involved in internal struggles and power struggles amongst the leaders in
Crossroads, so I left.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir I find that very difficult to believe, that you took
this man all the way to East London to expose him because you heard that
there was going to be a take-over and yet you don't even mention this -
you don't sit for the discussion between him and - I find it very
difficult.

MR SCHELHASE: It may be to expose him is a little bit hard, but I wanted
- I mean the reason why is that I would have liked Mr Ngxobongwana and
Ngobincqwa to discuss the problems of Crossroads so that if anything
comes out of the discussion which could make Mr Ngxobongwana suspicious
or pre-warned that they would sort it out there, at the spot, and not
bring the problems back to Crossroads and worsen the situation.

DR RAMASHALA: So you were often invited at the government level to talk
about the Oil Spot Strategy?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: And this document that we just identified actually supports
the Oil Spot Strategy?

MR SCHELHASE: Which document Ma'am?

DR RAMASHALA: The one that you translated.

MR SCHELHASE: The paragraph 9?

DR RAMASHALA: Yes.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

DR RAMASHALA: This document went to a very high level, State level.

MR SCHELHASE: I believe so, if I look at the stamp on the document, yes.

DR RAMASHALA: Would you then say that the strategy was supported by
Cabinet?

MR SCHELHASE: Obviously.

DR RAMASHALA: I want to repeat this question but in a different way. You
surely are aware of the on-going - you are aware of the on-going
allegations even today and a court case that investigated security force
complicity, and the attacks of the squatter camps by the Witdoeke, what
again are your views on this?

MR SCHELHASE: If I understand you correctly what was my ...(intervention)

DR RAMASHALA: Ja, I mean what ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: What are my views on the attack?

DR RAMASHALA: We've already established that the Development Board, the
security forces and the police and the Witdoeke were working together,
maybe not directly with the Development Board, as you said you did
nothing to stop it.

MR SCHELHASE: Ja we were - our function was basically a support function
in this whole strategic McEwan Strategy Ma'am. I mean it would - I mean
what could we have done to stop it? I mean what could I, as an individual
working in Crossroads, do to stop that type of violence.

DR RAMASHALA: But you didn't want to stop it. I mean the point is
...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: It was convenient for me not to try and stop it, although I
didn't agree with it necessarily but that's besides the point.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Burton.

MS BURTON: Thank you Chairperson. As I understand the Strategy, part of
the McEwan Strategy, part of the plan would be to identify the Oil Spots
where one could pacify and have an island of calm one might say.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

MS BURTON: Another part of it would also be to identify sources of
dissatisfaction, possible sparks that might ignite conflict or perhaps
more major things, and I would guess that one of the areas that would
have had to be considered was the whole question of the pass laws and how
they impacted on people's lives, would you say that the abolition of the
pass laws was part of a strategy in a way?

MR SCHELHASE: No Ma'am, I think practically the whole apparatus of State
collapsed and that they couldn't uphold the pass law administration any
longer. It was ...(intervention)

MS BURTON: Yes I think that's true that the very existence of Crossroads
demonstrated the inability of the State to sustain it.

MR SCHELHASE: Absolutely, yes.

MS BURTON: But perhaps nevertheless the strategic decision to abolish the
pass laws at about that time fitted in quite well with the rest of the
strategy.

	Now another of the potential sparks was the threatened move to
Khayalitsha. On the one hand that could have provided causes of conflict
and did so. On the other hand, from your point of view it was also going
to create the capacity to develop Crossroads by making more space.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

MS BURTON: You've talked about your passion for developing Crossroads,
would the needs of Khayalitsha have also fallen under your jurisdiction?

MR SCHELHASE: At first yes Ma'am, until 1986.

MS BURTON: So there should have been a parallel pressure to develop
Khayalitsha?

MR SCHELHASE: Well from 1984 onwards Khayalitsha was - they developed it
yes. I mean I still escorted and assisted the first 67 persons from KTC
who moved to Khayalitsha.

MS BURTON: I think we can see this, the various different strands of the
thinking coming together in a way, in this whole incident, but the thing
that is perhaps difficult to explain is the very senior attention that
was paid to it. You had high powered delegations of people coming down
from Pretoria to be briefed about the situation. I'd like to ask you
about that in a moment, but why, in your opinion, was it the focus of
such very high level interest?

MR SCHELHASE: To be honest with you Madam, I think there was a paucity in
government thinking about how to address the revolution, and that once
this McEwan strategy was presented by the military it made sense in a
way, but to uphold such a system as I explained just now needs all the
resources one can muster. The first, most important resource, is a
decision. I mean if we talk about R18 million worth of housing
development as part of a pacification scheme then we need people who can
make decisions of R18 million, which wasn't me. But you needed -and in
that context it became important that top level management should become
involved in the system and that they know about it which would probably
make their decision-making easier.

MS BURTON: You told our investigation unit about a presentation that you
had made, presumably along these lines to a very high level delegation.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes Ma'am.

MS BURTON: Would you like to tell the present Commission panel and
audience of ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: There were two presentations. The first presentation was in
1985, late '85, I am not positive, but that happened in Guguletu at the
Faseke Building where the then Minister of Defence General Malan and some
other generals and police and I don't know whether the Minister of Police
at the time was there, it was actually an embarrassment, and I can still
remember that General Malan was very unhappy about the way that the
violence vis a vis reward system was working in the Peninsula.

	And then the military decided to present, I think it was a few months or
a year after that, I am not sure, '86, to make another presentation and
this presentation was then made within the McEwan context, with the
strategical context of counter-revolution. Then the police had
contributed on the safety and security level. I have contributed on the
more economic, welfare, social level. The military did it on their
levels, so it was sensible to the recipients, General Malan, and he
supported it. And he said, well he's very glad that he can see that
there's some sort of systemic, there's some order in this whole approach
to the counter-revolution in the Western Cape. So I was involved there in
terms of presentations, yes.

MS BURTON: So if the establishment of Khayalitsha and its development
were part of an overall pacification plan you are saying that it was
important then to ensure that from the point of view of Crossroads and
it's satellite areas that plan was also able to be effected?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes, when we come to the original planning of Khayalitsha I
am not very certain, or absolutely not positive that Khayalitsha's
planning and development was part of a grander scheme of things, like a
grand strategy. I think the whole birth of Khayalitsha was just that it
happened because there was a lack of land and people were living in
ghastly, as you know Ma'am, in very terrible circumstances, and there was
a lot of influx, migration into the area and the areas became
over-inflated with - and it became survival problems. So we had to create
some more room and space for people to live.

MS BURTON: Thank you, thank you Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Ntsebeza.

MR NTSEBEZA: Thank you. Can I just follow up on some of the questions
that were asked by Commissioner Burton.

	How often did Roelf Meyer visit you?

MR SCHELHASE: Twice I think, I may be wrong but I think twice.

MR NTSEBEZA: Did he attend one of the presentations, the first
presentations at the end of 1985?

MR SCHELHASE: I think so.

MR NTSEBEZA: And what were his impressions? You have given us
...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Oh Roelf Meyer was also impressed because he was at the
time I think Chairman of the Security Council, and he was obviously in
support of General Malan and he would have said that if he's not happy
where we should do things in another way. But they had commended us Sir.

MR NTSEBEZA: He was, you would say his thinking was the same as that of
General Malan as far as ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: I would assume so, yes.

MR NTSEBEZA: And at that presentation was Adrian Vlok also there?

MR SCHELHASE: The second presentation he was there, yes.

MR NTSEBEZA: Yes. And would you say that Roelf Meyer's views would
coincide with the views of Adrian Vlok to the extent that you understood
Adrian Vlok's views to have been?

MR SCHELHASE: Sir I don't think that these personalities you name now had
any choice but to support each other in the type of strategical outlook
on things.

MR NTSEBEZA: Kat Liebenberg?

MR SCHELHASE: Excuse me?

MR NTSEBEZA: General Kat Liebenberg?

MR SCHELHASE: He was there.

MR NTSEBEZA: General Constand Viljoen?

MR SCHELHASE: I think he was there, I am not positive but I think he was
there.

MR NTSEBEZA: And were you present at presentations by the military?

MR SCHELHASE: Was I present at presentations?

MR NTSEBEZA: By the Military? I thought that you said ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Ja it was normally a combined thing, military, police and
civilians.

MR NTSEBEZA: Oh I see, alright.

MR SCHELHASE: But the military did have their own type of presentations
as well.

MR NTSEBEZA: And would it be your understanding of the military
perspective that part of the McEwan Strategy was not only
counter-revolutionary activities but counter-mobilisation as well?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes, it was part of the strategy Sir.

MR NTSEBEZA: And that part of what underlined counter-mobilisation was in
fact to take an attitude from some of the theories propounded by McEwan
that where you dealt with terrorists the method, and an effective method
to deal with them, was to track them down and eliminate them, do you
understand that to be the "terroriste te opspoor en hulle uittewis"?

MR SCHELHASE: Ja, ja.

MR NTSEBEZA: And if you look at what we now know as the Guguletu 7
wouldn't you see a pattern or a corollary, if the evidence is acceptable,
that there doesn't appear - or let me say, put it this way. If the
evidence in the Guguletu 7 saga suggests that there was no or little
effort to take prisoners, but merely to eliminate, take them out, as far
as you understand the McEwan strategy to have been, when you deal with
terrorists, "Jy moet terroriste to opspoor en hulle uittewis", would you
see a corollary?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes it is possible.

MR NTSEBEZA: And is it so that also the understanding of the McEwan
strategy, as was part and parcel of those presentations, was that enemy
leaders should be neutralised?

MR SCHELHASE: There are three phases within the McEwan Strategy Sir. The
first phase is what they call the organisation phase. A second phase is
the terrorist phase. A third phase is the guerilla phase. Now we didn't
have a guerilla situation in that sense of the term in the Western Cape,
but we did have incidences of terrorism or people who were associated
with terrorism. There were special police units as far as I came to know
that in the system who dealt with that specific situation.

	We were not involved actually in what happened with terrorists and how
they were caught and who caught them and so on. Our focus, when I say
"our" I talk about the civilians and some of the military personnel, we
were more focused on the organisation phase.

MR NTSEBEZA: Yes, yes I appreciate that Mr Schelhase, what I am trying to
say is, I am trying to get a sense of what your impressions were in the
two presentations that you have given us insofar as they were based on
the McEwan strategy. 	Do you recall if there was a view taken of what
would have been considered to be enemy leaders, I mean in terms of in the
context of what was taking place then you would appreciate that there
would be, also in terms of the Oil Spot strategy there would be sections
of the population which would be identified as friendly, government
friendly?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

MR NTSEBEZA: For instance ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Or anti......(intervention)

MR NTSEBEZA: Or anti-government ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: No, no, what I mean is that more - sorry for interrupting,
there's just a slight interpretational difference here, it could have
been that there were some people in the community that were not so much
on the part, on the side of the government or ideologically supporting
them, but more against the other side - let us call it (...indistinct)
against the ANC, they were perhaps more against the ANC than they were
pro the Nationalist Party if we want to put it in a political context.

MR NTSEBEZA: Yes. Now you would find that there would be those that for
instance would be considered to be pro-ANC.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

MR NTSEBEZA: And in the context of those times pro-ANC leaders would be
defined as enemy leaders.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes, most definitely.

MR NTSEBEZA: Now was there a view taken at those presentations as to what
should be done about enemy leaders? For instance was there a view taken
that they should be neutralised? Without giving any connotation to
...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Ja, as a matter of strategic principal yes I would agree
with that, that enemy leaders had to be neutralised, if they cannot be
converted, neutralise, yes.

MR NTSEBEZA: Would the view be taken that if they cannot be neutralised
they should in fact be eliminated?

MR SCHELHASE: One could assume so.

MR NTSEBEZA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Dumisa. Mapule.

DR RAMASHALA: I just have a few questions and I will round up. Sir would
you say that the Oil Spot Strategy was divided into two components? One
component targeted individuals to bring them on board through your reward
and incentive system?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

DR RAMASHALA: And the other strategy was to bring on board communities,
for example Crossroads was considered an Oil Spot Strategy?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes, you're right.

DR RAMASHALA: And that in fact by engaging both individuals and
communities you would succeed in preventing pro-ANC factions into coming
into that community?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

DR RAMASHALA: Well I think there is enough evidence now to show that the
police and the security forces, not only supported, philosophically and
otherwise, supported the Witdoeke, but in fact actively engaged in the
conflict. For example the security forces alleged to have helped in the
burning of houses, of shooting down comrades who were trying to protect
their properties, particularly in KTC. What were your observations during
the conflict about what I have just said?

MR SCHELHASE: Madam what you have now related is also what I want to
relate to you. You haven't seen it but you have heard of it. The same
with me. I was never actively inside Crossroads while fighting was taking
place and when KTC was involved I was - it was out of my area of
jurisdiction in any case. It was of no concern of mine.

	But I must state it categorically Madam and to the Commission, that I
have never ever seen a policeman actively involved in supporting Witdoeke
by burning houses and shacks and shooting people, I have never seen it
and I would be a blatant liar if I had to say yes.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir, in fact yesterday Sam Ndima mentioned in his testimony
that you not only supplied the Witdoeke with guns, particularly during
the period 1981 to 1986 but that in fact you provided training for
...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Where must I get the guns Madam to supply people?

DR RAMASHALA: I have no idea?

MR SCHELHASE: Neither do I.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mr Schelhase. I just see some contradictions here.
The witness before yourself came up here and one of the things that was
said was that I thought he was behaving in a way that suggests that he's
being evasive.

	You say yourself, you stated on the record that your strategy encouraged
the war against people who were opposed to the government, you did not
use those words but it is clear, clearly implied, that the people you
were supporting, you being from yourself right up to the Minister and
government, were fighting those who were opposed to the government. And
then you go on to tell us now that you never saw police supporting the
Witdoeke. Now what is the value of that statement that you are putting on
record?

	You never saw the police support, actively supporting the Witdoeke and
yet we have heard numerous accounts, people who are respectable citizens
in this country, and not only that we've got video footage clearly
demonstrating the support and backing of Witdoeke by police. And then you
come to tell us now in your testimony that you never saw police - what is
the value of that statement?

MR SCHELHASE: No, I will tell you what the value of the statement is
Ma'am. I have never said, on no record in no interview, nowhere have I
said that the police did not support the Witdoeke. I have not said that.
And if they did support them we all make that conclusion in the end.

	What I have said here is I have never seen a policeman shoot somebody in
that '86 war, in a conflict or burn - I have seen many houses burnt, of
course it was right next to me, but I have never seen a policeman
actively putting a shack alight ...(intervention)

CHAIRPERSON: I do not deny that ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Well that's what I said.

CHAIRPERSON: But I merely - my question is, what is the value, because
obviously when you say things in a hearing such as this one you are
planting seeds either of doubt or of whatever view that you are holding,
so what is the - I am just asking what is the value of that statement?

MR SCHELHASE: Well the value of the statement is also what I experienced
Ma'am. I mean I think it is for the Commission to make - take the value
of the system in the way that they interpret it, the statement.

CHAIRPERSON: I guess really I was making a point more than asking a
question.

MR SCHELHASE: I see.

CHAIRPERSON: Because you have stated that you do not deny that they were.

MR SCHELHASE: Absolutely.

CHAIRPERSON: I will just ask Dr Ramashala to ask you the question.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir, you do say that you did not observe the police helping
the Witdoeke, but you suspect, I mean your conclusion ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Sure, sure.

DR RAMASHALA: ...is that you suspect. Right, thank you. Incidentally this
document authorises travel to King Williamstown and not to East London.

MR SCHELHASE: Sorry Ma'am then we probably took a car to East London.

DR RAMASHALA: Sir I am going to ask you my last question. It is alleged
that the police, the security forces and maybe some of the people
involved in development administration practised their own brand of rape,
and I'm calling it a brand of rape because it's not rape in the true
sense. It is alleged throughout the country and in this case in this area
that is subject to our discussion, that these people took advantage of
the fears experienced by women, took advantage by establishing some
liaison, sexual liaison where they regularly had, I don't want to call
them girlfriends, but regular points of sexual satisfaction, that people
had nowhere to go, targeting women who were too afraid to say no because
they knew what would happen to them. That in fact some of these men
fathered children. And I assume since it was not made public that these
men walked away from these children.

	Do you say no, remember you are under oath, do you know of any such
situation either personally or through hearsay?

MR SCHELHASE: No Ma'am.

DR RAMASHALA: What about the police?

MR SCHELHASE: I wouldn't know.

DR RAMASHALA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Dr Ramashala. Just one last issue. Mr Ngxobongwana
seems to have brushed shoulders with very senior people. You mentioned
earlier that Mr Roelf Meyer visited quite frequently, in fact it was
Josette (...indistinct) showed me a picture of Mr Ngxobongwana standing
with Mr Roelf Meyer, and I think I saw a picture of Ngxobongwana with -
or someone mentioned that he even brushed shoulders with the State
President, if it's right.

MR SCHELHASE: That's right, yes Ma'am.

CHAIRPERSON: So he was known personally by the State President?

MR SCHELHASE: Well I think they met once at the opening of the training
centre in Crossroads. Mr Botha at the time opened the training centre and
Mr Ngxobongwana was the Mayor of Crossroads, so I mean obviously they had
to as you say, brush shoulders.

CHAIRPERSON: Was there any development that you ever engaged in in the
other area that Mr Yamile was leader of?

MR SCHELHASE: At the time when Mr Yamile was still in Crossroads?

CHAIRPERSON: When Mr Yamile had his section as leader?

MR SCHELHASE: Yes we provided water there and refuse removal and the
normal municipal services in Mr Yamile's area, in all - the entire
Crossroads.

CHAIRPERSON: But Mr Yamile did not enjoy the friendship with highly
placed people that Mr Ngxobongwana did?

MR SCHELHASE: No, no.

CHAIRPERSON: Just one very last question. When you review your strategies
at the time and you look at what you yourself called the negative
consequences, for example many of the family members here of people who
were killed as a result of, or partly as a result of that strategy, where
would you place the accountability of the brutality that took place in
the Crossroads area, KTC?

MR SCHELHASE: On some of the people of Crossroads and on the system.

CHAIRPERSON: On the system and on ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: On the government system ...(intervention)

CHAIRPERSON: And on the leadership there.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much Mr Schelhase. Dr Ramashala.

DR RAMASHALA: Mr Schelhase after KTC was conquered so-to-speak, do you
know of any major celebration by the Witdoeke where a cow was slaughtered
to celebrate?

MR SCHELHASE: No not about KTC but we have been involved in the
slaughtering of cattle in Crossroads, but not for KTC, definitely not,
not when I was present.

DR RAMASHALA: The slaughtering of cattle in celebration in Crossroads?

MR SCHELHASE: Ja, I cannot remember what we celebrated Ma'am, it happened
twice. ...(intervention)

DR RAMASHALA: There are so many things ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Ja but it was long afterwards in 1988, I am talking about
1988 now.

DR RAMASHALA: All of you ...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Oh I'll tell you why, it was after the election of Mr
Ngxobongwana and the councillors in Crossroads, that was ...(tape ends)

DR RAMASHALA: Remember I talked about the convergence of interest
...(intervention)

MR SCHELHASE: Yes, yes. ...(intervention)

DR RAMASHALA: That you all succeeded in accomplishing that, and that the
government indeed bought the cattle for you to celebrate.

MR SCHELHASE: Yes.

DR RAMASHALA: Okay, thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Dr Ramashala. Mr Ntsebeza is going to make some
closing comments before you leave.

MR SCHELHASE: Thank you.

MR NTSEBEZA: Well it remains for me Mr Schelhase to thank you for having
come. And especially for what I consider to be an instructive testimony.
I would only want you to leave here with a firm conviction that even
though some questions were robust and a bit rough, that behind those sort
of questions and the attitude that seems to emanate from those questions
lies an honesty and an endeavour by the panel members to try and arrive
at the truth.

	As I have said over the last few days, not for its own sake but to the
extent that it can assist us to find a solution to the future, the past,
with all its horrors, is something that we would like to forget but we
are not going to be able to forget it if we do not know what underlay the
symptoms that were visible on the surface.

	I think your contribution, especially in the area of the philosophy that
underpinned the strategies that were adopted, the decisions that were
arrived at as a consequence of the pursuit of that strategy, were very
illuminating and I am sure they will go a long distance in assisting us
with other conclusions that we draw from other investigative inquiries to
enable us to have an idea of what contributed to those sort-of conflicts.
Because one of the aims of the Commission is to make a recommendation to
the powers that be that must ensure that such incidents should never
happen. That a democracy underpinned by a constitution that guarantees
human rights should never have to rely on an Oil Strategy for the
resolution of conflicts that arise in communities.

	Thank you Sir.

MR SCHELHASE: Thank you very much Sir. Thanks Madam.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. We are going to break for lunch and if you could
please be back here at exactly two o'clock.

HEARING ADJOURNS

