
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 07.08.96				NAME: PAULINE MATSIE MBATHA

CASE: 140 - SEBOKENG

__________________________________________________________

PAULINE MATSIE MBATHA:	(sworn states)

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mbatha, will you just take your time and tell us what
happened on that night in June 1992.

MRS MBATHA: On the 17th of June 1992, people came to my place. It was at
night and I was sleeping. It was about 9 o'clock in the evening and we
heard the sound of shattering windows. As we were still asking ourselves
as to what's the problem, we heard some voices mumbling at the door. Then
my husband decided to go and investigate what was happening at the door,
and I also woke up, I followed him. When we got to the door we noticed
that people were busy stabbing the door with assegais as well as with
spears. I ran into the bedroom where I was sleeping. Just as I was
getting under the bed trying to hide myself, they gained entry into the
house and they asked where the dogs were.

	As I was trying to hide under the bed, they came, they stabbed me all
over the body, they even stabbed me on my neck and now I'm a
quadriplegic. My husband is the one who saw them and all that they did.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mbatha, is there anything else that you wanted to add?

MRS MBATHA: Anything that I want to add Sir?

DR RANDERA: Is there anything else you want to say?

MRS MBATHA: I have left nothing out because I lost consciousness at the
time that they were stabbing me. I lost my consciousness but my husband
saw what happened

HRV/140	thereafter/...



	2	

thereafter, because I was with him at the time that this happened.

DR RANDERA: I'm not trying to be difficult but we're

going to stay with your statement. So you lost consciousness, when did
you wake up again and where were you when you woke up?

MRS MBATHA: I gained my consciousness at the hospital.

DR RANDERA: Was that at the Sebokeng hospital?

MRS MBATHA: Yes it was the Sebokeng hospital.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mbatha, you say in your statement that there were White
policemen standing outside, dressed in police uniform. Is this something
that your husband told you?

MRS MBATHA: Yes he's the one who told me that he saw them. He even saw
that they were policemen and they were wearing police uniforms.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mbatha, I am going to ask your husband just to take the
oath so that he can also tell us what happened please.

JOHANNES MBATHA:	(sworn states)

DR RANDERA: Mr Mbatha, would you please tell us then what happened that
night?

MR MBATHA: On that particular night, it was in June. I had just arrived
home because I had gone to my brother at Slovoville. It was just before
nine when I arrived, then I told my brother that I ought to go before
nine. I needed to sleep before nine. When I got home there was nothing
amiss. I watched the 9 o'clock news and immediately thereafter I went to
sleep.

	Just after a little while I had slept, I think it was at about 10
o'clock, I heard the sound of shattering glass. HRV/140	Just/...



	3	

Just as I woke up to try and investigate to what was taking place, I
peeped through the door-hole to try and see what was happening at that
time. There is a very big lamp outside my yard which is very bright and
it brightened my yard as well. I saw a group of people, there were three
separate groups coming towards the house. There were some others who were
stabbing people, who were throwing stones, who were creating some noise,
so that people could go out and investigate. Then I tried to look through
the window. Then there is another one who saw me. He was also throwing
stones. Then he told this other group, which was coming behind and
indicated that they should get into our yard because there were people.
He had seen somebody peeping through the window.

	Just as he had said that, I realised that police were there but I felt
as if I was dreaming because I didn't believe that police could be there.
Then I ran inside my house and I hid myself behind the wardrobe. They
kicked the door, tried to push it, tried to break it. They were even
stabbing the door with assegais and spears until such time that they
gained entry. Then they got inside the house, all of them. The group got
inside the house and they directed another one to go and ask for matches
from another policeman. They said they wanted to burn the house down.
They had already stabbed my dog which was outside.

	They came in and they saw the puppies and they proceeded toward the
other room. They went into the room in which my wife ran. They stabbed
her, stabbed her a lot of times in the body. I was behind the wardrobe
looking at them when they were stabbing my wife. As I was very scared at
that time, I couldn't even look at them. I hid myself behind
HRV/140	the/...



	4	

the wardrobe throughout the whole ordeal. They stabbed her several times
and they came to the very same wardrobe behind which I was hiding. They
tried to tamper with the wardrobe. They kicked the doors open, they took
radio cassettes, they took the clothes as well and they went out.

	Just as they were going out I followed them. I wanted to look at which
direction they were heading. At the corner of the street I saw their cars
and they got in together. I hopped inside the house to try and see as to
how my wife was faring. I discovered that she had lost consciousness.
Some of the veins have been severed. I ran to my neighbours to enlist
some help for them to call the ambulance to come and pick my wife up. The
ambulance came quite timeously.

	I tried to direct the people to Slovo then we drove. As we were heading
towards the robot, we saw the very same cars but were parked at the
corner of my street. Their lights were off but the lights in the street
were bright so I could see those cars but the cars were driving without
their lights on. Then when we got to the hospital, they were heading
towards the Kwamadala Hostel. I looked at those cars as to their colours,
I looked whilst I was still inside the ambulance. I wanted to get a
proper look at their cars. I even wanted to see the uniform of the
people, whether they were the very same people who came into my house.

	In the morning the very same people came in the very same uniform. They
were still like the previous day. They took my name, they said they
needed some statement as to who had injured the people. I was quite
scared to tell them that, "You are the ones who were here yesterday".

CHAIRPERSON: May we have some order please and silence. Order please!
Thank you.

HRV/140	MR MBATHA:/...

	5	

MR MBATHA: When we got to the hospital, there were only

two doctors on duty. It was a male as well as a female doctor, and people
were full there, they were injured and they were trying to help those
people to get medical attention. At about 12 o'clock the doctors go to
tea and people were busy dying right in front of us, while the doctors
had gone for tea.

	We saw so many wheelchairs there and there were no more doctors except
for the two Doctors Buhe and Juta. Then there was another woman who was
fat and they were using her, she was running around.

CHAIRPERSON: I ask for silence please. Ladies and gentlemen, order
please! Order please. Thank you very much.

Please can you be quiet, please. Mr Mbatha, is there anything else you
want to say?

MR MBATHA: I haven't forgotten anything.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mr Mbatha, I will come back to you. I just want to
go back to your wife. Mrs Mbatha, did you stay all the time in Sebokeng
hospital or did they transfer you to another hospital?

MRS MBATHA: They transferred me to Natalspruit hospital.

DR RANDERA: And how long did you stay at Natalspruit hospital?

MRS MBATHA:	I don't remember, it's several months. I'm not sure whether
it's five months or how many months. I'm not quite certain, but it was
quite a long time. Most of the people who were injured had already been
discharged.

DR RANDERA: Can I just ask, do you have any children?

MRS MBATHA:	Yes we do have children.

DR RANDERA: The children were not there that night?

MRS MBATHA: They were not at home because they are

HRV/140	attending/...



	6	

attending school in the rural areas in Qwa Qwa.

DR RANDERA: How old are your children?

MRS MBATHA:	The eldest is 22 years old, the other one is 19, the last one
is 14 years old.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mrs Mbatha. I just want to ask a few questions of
your husband. Mr Mbatha, please can we just remember that you are under
oath and what you say has to be thought out very carefully. I want to ask
about this question of, I wasn't clear when you said it, at one stage you
said you thought you were dreaming that there were policemen in uniforms.
Are you absolutely certain they were policemen in uniforms there?

MR MBATHA: I don't believe that I could tell a lie that they were
policemen, because I even saw their cars.

DR RANDERA: Can I ask, have you ever made this statement to any other
lawyers?

MR MBATHA: There is a statement that I submitted to some attorney but
there's absolutely nothing that comes out of it. I struggled for quite a
long time running up and down, trying to get some help but I couldn't get
any help. Nobody was prepared to help me. I went to two lawyers, one
white guy and I realised they were just writing me a lot of letters which
were not helping me in any way. Because I cannot cope, I have to keep on
carrying my wife because she's a quadriplegic. She cannot cope also. I
even wrote to the President, Nelson Mandela, they sent me to minister
Thabo Mbeki. Even now Thabo Mbeki has been telling me that he has heard
my story but he doesn't do anything about it. Then he told me that there
is absolutely nothing that they can do about my wife's case.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mr Mbatha.

HRV/140	CHAIRPERSON:/...



	7	

CHAIRPERSON: I'm asking again, please help us by being

very quiet, very silent, to have order in order to give the witness and
the counsellor the best chance possible to conduct this story.

DR RANDERA: My last question, you said that after they left the house you
followed them and they got into cars. In the statement of your wife, it
said that they got into Hippos. Can we just get some clarification here,
did they get into cars or did they get into Hippos?

MR MBATHA: They got into the Hippos. They were driving Hippos when they
came into the township, even when they went back they were driving
Hippos, because when we went to the hospital, the Hippos were driving
them into Kwamadala hostel.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mr Mbatha and Mrs Mbatha.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Dr Boraine has a question or two and then I'll
hand over to Mrs Seroke.

DR BORAINE: I just have one question actually. Mrs Mbatha, you have
suffered very terribly and you are still suffering today as a result of
what happened that night. Have you been granted any kind of pension, do
you receive any kind of an allowance because of being a quadriplegic and
if so, from whom?

MRS MBATHA:	A State grant.

DR BORAINE: You receive a State grant?

MR MBATHA: That's correct.

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mrs Joyce Seroke.

MRS SEROKE: Before this happened what were you doing?

MRS MBATHA: I was working as a domestic.

MRS SEROKE: Are you still staying at the same place where

HRV/140	this/...



	8	

this incident took place?	

MRS MBATHA: Yes we are still staying there.

MRS SEROKE: Now where did you get this wheelchair?

MRS MBATHA:	I was given it at the Natalspruit hospital. It has never been
broken but it's small now because I am big. I have gone to Sebokeng to
try and get a new wheelchair but they told me that they could not get
bigger wheelchairs.

MRS SEROKE: Do you Mr Mbatha, when you said it was as if you were
dreaming when you saw the police, were you saying that because you did
not believe that you could see them or you were not expecting that they
could be at that place at that time?

MR MBATHA: What I meant was that according to me, they were not supposed
to be there, attack people or be involved in making people to death,
because they had put doeks on their head but we could see that they were
police. They also had some clothes on their heads. Now they also had
assegais as well as guns. When you run away they would shoot you. Now I
was very disappointed to see police acting in that manner. I am very
ashamed.

CHAIRPERSON: Once again, once again I ask ladies and gentlemen that you
keep quiet.

MRS SEROKE: They have killed there, the last one Mrs Mbatha, yesterday
there was a suggestion that the mothers that were affected in the Vaal
area, should come together to try and sort out things with regard to
reconciliation. We know that you are now a quadriplegic. You cannot cope
as it is now. What do you expect from the Commission. How can we help in
order that there could be reconciliation in this place?



HRV/140	MRS MBATHA:/...

	9	

MRS MBATHA: I don't understand your question.

MRS SEROKE: Yesterday you were not here when we were talking and dealing
with other aspects, but there was a suggestion that people in the Vaal
Triangle area should come together as the things now have changed, we are
looking at a new era, reconciliation as well as peace. Do you also share
the same thought?

MRS MBATHA: Yes I do share the same thoughts of reconciliation.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Mbatha, Mr Johannes Mbatha, I thank you very much for
coming to us and to tell us your story. There's just one question to be
asked still by Dr Randera and then I will allow you to go back to your
places.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Mbatha, I just wonder whether you will tell us how much
you receive from this disability grant from the State?

MR MBATHA: I'm getting R420.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Mbatha, we've been listening to your story. We've been
listening to the story of your husband Johannes who helped you with your
story. We really feel for you. It must be extremely difficult to sit in
your wheelchair being quadriplegic. Thank you for being with us and may
the Lord really help you in years to come. We've listened to what you
said, your requests will be taken to the Truth Commission. I was
especially moved by what you said at the very last instance, that you do
feel in spite of everything, that reconciliation is still possible, that
you want reconciliation for your community. Thank you for that testimony,
for that witness and now you may take your place again.

	----------------------



