
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 06.08.96		NAME: MAMSONDO MADUNA

CASE: 800 - SEBOKENG

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Maduna good afternoon. Welcome. Can you introduce the
person who is here with you, sitting next to you.

MRS MADUNA: It's my son Petros Maduna.

CHAIRPERSON: Welcome to Petros as well. Mrs Maduna Dr Russel Ali is going
to help you tell your story. You are going to talk about Fanyana Ruben
Maduna who died after an IFP rally. Before I hand over to Dr Ally can you
please stand to take the oath.

MAMSONDO MADUNA: (sworn states)

DR ALLY: Welcome Mrs Maduna. You are coming to speak about your son Ruben
Maduna who was killed after a meeting by the IFP on the 22nd of July
1990. Could you relate to us the events of that day?

MRS MADUNA: It was on a Sunday, it's about quarter to four some youths
came. They said they were sent by Mrs Mohapi to come and tell me that my
son was lying beside the road. I summoned my daughter and I asked as to
how he could sleep beside the street and I sent them to go and look. I
followed them thereafter. When we went there to look he was already
removed and taken to the hospital and a police van came and they said to
us we must go and fight for ourselves. But I did not understand what they
meant because I did not know what they were referring to. Then from there
we went to the hospital and when we got to the hospital we found that he
had been dead on arrival and he was taken to the

HRV/800	mortuary/...

	2	

mortuary. On the following day we went to the mortuary at the hospital.
When we got there we found the place full and they said we must go to the
court. We got him at the police station mortuary. And we took him to
Kambula's Mortuary and I had decided that I was going to bury my son all
by myself. We received a report that we could not bury my son alone. They
had to be buried as a group, as they had died together. The Kambula
family was very sympathetic because I never paid for the mortuary
expenses. They were buried together.

DR ALLY: Thank you Mrs Maduna. Just a few questions please. First, your
son Ruben, how old was he when he was killed?

MRS MADUNA: He was 19 years old when he died.

DR ALLY: Now we've heard that this period was a particularly tense period
in the area, that people were fearing that the situation was going to
perhaps get out of control, your son before this event of the 22nd of
July 1990, was he in any way involved in any of the events which were
taking place in the township?

MRS MADUNA: According to my knowledge I cannot confirm or deny that, but
what I know is that he was an SRC member at school.

DR ALLY: Is that what you were told that he was a SRC member or did he
tell you that, your son?

MRS MADUNA: I was told by his teacher who had come to investigate and see
whether it was true that he had passed away.

DR ALLY: Mrs Maduna earlier that month before the meeting of Inkatha at
the stadium, the meeting of the 22nd of July there was an earlier rally
on June the 2nd which was an ANC rally, were you knowledgeable about that
and do you know if

HRV/800	your/...

	3	

your son was actually involved in that earlier rally of June the 2nd?

MRS MADUNA: I cannot confirm that because I was working and I was not
staying at home at that time.

DR ALLY: From what you know about this incident do you think that what
happened to your son was because he also happened to be out on the
streets that day or do you think that your son was a target that he was
somebody who was known as an activist and that's possibly why he was
killed?

MRS MADUNA: I'm really not sure because at that time he had gone to visit
Mrs Mohapi's place at Zone 13, so he was coming from Mrs Mohapi's place
when he got killed.

DR ALLY: Did your son ever discuss with you his views of the conflict
that was taking place in the township? Did he indicate to you how he felt
about what was happening or express any views about Inkatha or the ANC?

MRS MADUNA: He has never told me anything about that.

DR ALLY: Thank you Mrs Maduna.

CHAIRPERSON: Any questions from the other Commissioners?

DR RANDERA: Mrs Maduna just a few questions. You say you were working on
that day, where were you working?

MRS MADUNA: I was working at Vereeniging.

DR RANDERA: So were you going home every day from your home to
Vereeniging?

MRS MADUNA: I used to go to commute to and from work daily, but each time
I come back from work he used to be in the house and he used to do the
house chores and help me with the house.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mrs Maduna. Mrs Maduna can you then, I mean you
were there in the community, you were living, I know you were working
away from Sebokeng but can you just

HRV/800	tell/...

	4	

tell us what the atmosphere was? Dr Ally has already said that there was
a rally on July the 2nd held in Sebokeng by the ANC and at that rally it
was announced that there was going to be a week long action to highlight
what was happening in KwaZulu Natal in terms of the war that was going on
there, were you aware of all these things, was your son aware of all
these things?

MRS MADUNA: I knew nothing about that because I didn't have any interest,
I wasn't staying at home, I was just working. Maybe he knew something but
he had never discussed it with me.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mrs Maduna I don't have any other questions.

PROF MEIRING: Mrs Maduna I need your advice. The Truth Commission, as I
have already explained today, need to take the pain of the people very
seriously and we need to make recommendations for rehabilitation and for
reparation. You came here today as a mother to tell us the story of your
son who died, passed away. There are many more mothers in Sebokeng who
have lost their children, what advice can the Truth Commission give to
Parliament? What can we do to alleviate the pain of the mothers that
suffered in Sebokeng?

MRS MADUNA: My request is that if it is possible we want to erect
monuments for our children.

PROF MEIRING: Do you think that, or do you say that if there's a monument
either in Sebokeng or a national monument somewhere in the country that
will be a symbol of reconciliation to all of us?

MRS MADUNA: Yes, that's what I believe.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you very much for having come here to tell us about
your story just like the two other women

HRV/800	who/...

	5	

who have come forward. We do sympathise with you that your children have
died in such a gruesome manner. This indicates our horrible past, that is
the apartheid days. They made us suffer in such a horrendous manner and
many people died, some disappeared without any trace. Just like you, you
have just said that your child had been killed whilst he was just an
innocent person. We also do want to take your request into consideration.
However, we pass the recommendations to the State President. He makes a
final decision as to what should be done so that we may promote
reconciliation. Thank you.

	-------------------------

