
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 07.08.96	NAME: PULE IRISH MOLOTSI

CASE: 813 - SEBOKENG

__________________________________________________________

PULE IRISH MOLOTSI: (sworn states)

DR BORAINE: Thank you very much Dr Randera as Chairperson. Mr Molotsi my
own word of welcome to you as well and a very special word of welcome to
Papi's mother and we are very pleased that she has come and I hope she
can hear us all right through the earphones. You've come to tell us a
story which involves yourself but also especially involves Papi Boshego
who was killed and you are going to tell us how that happened. This is a
very awful story of yet another loss of life and your own injury, would
you please tell us what happened that night.

MR MOLOTSI: It was on the 20th of June in 1993. We were still resting in
a shack the three of us. As we were sitting I was drinking, drinking my
beer. We stayed in the shack until in the morning. While we were sitting
we heard dogs barking outside, and Papi stood up and he said to us I'm
just going outside to investigate what was happening. After he went out I
followed him. We took a few rounds within the yard but we couldn't see
anything, but as we turned our backs to get into the house we only heard
gunshots. I managed to run behind the shack and I sat down. I sat for
quite some time. I think ten minutes and I saw flashlights moving around.
I am referring to torches. And after a few minutes I heard walkie talkies
and I said oh no these are the police. And as I was wondering sitting
there I saw the light approaching me. One of them approached and

HRV/813	he/...

	2	

he said to me, he actually pulled his gun and he wanted to shoot, but the
other one said to him wait a minute, and he continually said you are very
lucky. And the other one said you must take a look at us, we are a
different group. Lie down on your stomachs. I lied on my stomach. They
said I should stand up. I stood up. They said where is a .38 revolver. I
said to them I do not know anything about that. 	They asked me to which
organisation did I belong. I said no I don't belong to any. One of them
slapped me and he said you are a Apla. And I decided to tell them the
truth. I said to them I am a member of the ANC. They asked me where the
person was, the person I was with, I said to them I don't know what
happened to him. They took me to the front and the deceased was lying on
the ground dead and he had a gun in his hand. They asked me as to any
knowledge of the gun. I said no this person didn't have a gun in his
hand. They said can you please tell us the truth. If you can tell us the
truth we will call the ambulance to come and pick him up. And I said to
them he didn't have a gun in his hand. As we were still there we saw an
ambulance coming. I was guarded by a Black policeman in the ambulance.
That was the first Black policeman I saw. They quickly treated me and I
was taken to Houtkop. I left the hospital together with these policemen.

	When we were at Houtkop we were put in the charge office. There is a
long corridor on the right-hand side, and there is the last room. The
perpetrators were in that room, gathered in that room and one of them had
three stars on his shoulders. He said yes Dick thief. I said to him why
did you shoot at us? And he said Papi wanted to shoot at us first. They
asked me as to whether I want to see him, HRV/813	I/...

	3	

I said yes. They took me to the mortuary. When we were there they opened
the drawer and I saw him. And I thought he just fainted he would be okay,
but it wasn't the case, he had already died. But the tall one with his
badge written "Nagel" on it he said no your brother, Makwetu is alive,
Mandela is alive, your brother is dead, now what do you say? I started
crying and they took me into the charge office and they put me further
into a cell. As I was in the cell another policeman came to me and he
said tell me how did you survive the ordeal? The dead person is badly
damaged. I asked him how many bullets, he said close to 11 bullets.

	It was on a Sunday, the Red Cross people came, they came to visit me and
they asked the same question. They asked me how many bullets, the Red
Cross people said they only saw seven wounds. I was taken back to the
cell. The next day I was taken to court and I was charged for illegal
possession of a firearm and I was bailed with R200,00. I was taken to
Leeuwhof Prison then the Street Committee people came to bail me out. I
went back home.

	I can't remember how many times have I been to court and I can't even
remember how many times have I been arrested. The magistrate would just
say your case has been finalised without anything from me, until today.
Even today I'm still going to the courts. Yesterday I was in court. I was
with those White people. They stated their issue and I was told that I
would appear before the court again on the 4th of September. I would end
up there.

DR BORAINE: Mr Molotsi thank you very much for your testimony. I know
that this must be very hard for Mrs Boshego to hear about what happened
to her son, and I want her to know that we think very much of her. I have
only a

HRV/813	few/...

	4	

few questions. You were sitting in a home with two friends and then the
police arrived. Now have you any idea whether there was a raid in the
area? Was there a disturbance? Was there a riot? Why do you think the
police came to the home where you were?

MR MOLOTSI: The police didn't come into the shack. We only heard dogs
barking and Papi went out to check and I followed him. But when we looked
around nothing could be seen. I think they were lying on the ground
because when I ran away I saw the sparkles as they were shooting. About
the unrest there was no unrest in the township.

DR BORAINE: I still am a little puzzled as to why they were in such large
numbers in that particular area at that particular time, can you guess, I
mean do you think they were looking for you or they were looking for your
friend or why were they there?

MR MOLOTSI: As they were telling their story in the court of law they
said a police had been chased away by the youth and he was assaulted and
the people wanted to burn him. And the people who did that were at the
corner already burning a tyre. I do not know what happened thereafter.
But I think our sin was to get out of the shack to investigate as to what
was going on outside as the dogs were barking.

DR BORAINE: Thank you. That's quite helpful. Papi Boshego was he a
political activist in any way?

MR MOLOTSI: Yes he was one of the ANC Youth League members, he had a card.

DR BORAINE: And you were, as you have already mentioned you were not
Apla, but you were an ANC supporter?

MR MOLOTSI: Correct, I am also a card carrying member of the ANC.

HRV/813	DR BORAINE:/...

	5	

DR BORAINE: Thank you. I want to ask you a little bit about the revolver
that was seen in the hands of Papi when he was already lying dead. Now
you were with him for many hours, did you see the gun at all before?

MR MOLOTSI: He never had a gun at all. To show that these people were
lying they put the gun into his right hand and he was a left-hand man.

DR BORAINE: So you are of the view that the police themselves put the gun
in his hand after they shot him?

MR MOLOTSI: That is the version Sir.

DR BORAINE: Now you were charged with the possession of the firearm, was
this the same firearm?

MR MOLOTSI: No they said I had my own gun but I've never seen a gun
before.

CHAIRPERSON: Silence please, may I have order please. Thank you.

DR BORAINE: Now in the court case have they produced any other additional
gun and said this was your gun, I mean what kind of case can they have
against you?

MR MOLOTSI: No they never produced any gun Sir.

DR BORAINE: Now you mentioned in your original statement that your
particular case was actually withdrawn, but now you have told us that you
are still being charged and having to attend court, is that so?

MR MOLOTSI: I am still going to the court of law Sir, since the beginning
of this year and last year I have been to court on many occasions, but I
was never given a chance to say any words. They were given their time to
speak and they indicated as to how many bullets they spent on shooting
us. They said they used 76 bullets to shoot at us. One of the Captains
had a R5 rifle and his magazine was loaded with HRV/813	eight/...

	6	

eight and it was all used. The other one also had 30 but one was not
used. There were two Captains in the group of policemen. And the other
one said his magazine was loaded 50 and he used the whole 50. The other
one used just one. They shot, they even killed the next door neighbour's
dog.

CHAIRPERSON: Order please.

MS SEROKE: Can you please be quiet. We request you to be quiet.

DR BORAINE: I have only one last question but it's a very important
question and I hope you will help me with this one. The court case that
has been taking so long is that an inquest surrounding the death of your
friend, and if not was there an inquest separately and what was the
result? If it was the inquest are you a witness at the inquest or are you
actually on charge of possession of a firearm?

MR MOLOTSI: As they have been arresting me I thought for a year I would
be resting but now the people from the Police Investigative Unit came
back and they took my statement. They said my case would be reopened
because my case wouldn't just end nowhere. They have to get to the core
of the matter. They said we would go to the private court, but when we
went to the private court they said we are not going to reveal as to who
is wrong, who is not wrong, but the father of the deceased said he would
find himself a lawyer and investigate this matter thoroughly. That is why
the case is still continuing until today.

DR BORAINE: Do you know if the family of Papi Boshego do they have a
death certificate and if so what was the cause of death?

MR MOLOTSI: Yes they have the death certificate.

DR BORAINE: And obviously the cause of death was by, as a

HRV/813	result/...

	7	

result of being shot, do they indicate how many times he was shot on the
death certificate?

MR MOLOTSI: No there is no indication as to how many times was he shot.
When the deceased's father wanted to see the body they said no he could
not see him, and he said to them you will not conduct the post mortem
before I could see the body, and they said to him you listen to us or you
don't.

DR BORAINE: Thank you. Is there anything else you want to add before I
hand you back to the Chairperson?

CHAIRPERSON: It seems to me that you are finished with your story. I ask
Dr Randera to ask a few questions.

DR RANDERA: Mr Molotsi can you tell us, there was a third person that you
and Papi went to visit that night Mr Basi Motaung, did he sustain any
injuries? Was he in the ...(intervention)

MR MOLOTSI: He was the whole time in the shack. When the two of us went
out he was left behind. After this incident he was taken to the doctor,
he is mentally disturbed, he is totally mad.

DR RANDERA: Was he a member of any political organisation?

MR MOLOTSI: No he was just an ordinary person.

DR RANDERA: Can I then just ask a direct question of both of you and you
seem to know a lot about Papi as well, were you MK members as well? You
say you are an ANC member, an ANC Youth League member, were you MK
members?

MR MOLOTSI: No, no Sir.

DR RANDERA: And my last question, sorry two questions, one is related to
all these proceedings that are going on, do you have a lawyer yourself?

MR MOLOTSI: The father to the deceased organised us a lawyer.

HRV/813	DR RANDERA:/...

	8	

DR RANDERA: What's the name of the lawyer?

MR MOLOTSI: Our legal representative is Gaka, but I have seen the other
one is new, he is from Johannesburg. I think I have his name here.

DR RANDERA: Okay we will try and get that from you.

MR MOLOTSI: His name is Taki Madima.

DR RANDERA: My last question is about your own injuries, you said you
were shot in the leg, but it sounds as if you went to the hospital and
then they took you back to the prison on the same day, am I right to
assume that?

MR MOLOTSI: That's correct Sir, that is on the same day. The doctor
wanted to say something to them and they said to him I am urgently needed
at the Houtkop police station.

DR RANDERA: So you were not left with any permanent disability as far as
the shooting went?

MR MOLOTSI: I am disabled Sir because the doctor examined me. After I was
given bail I went back to the doctor, it was Dr Manoto, and Dr Manoto
wrote everything down as to my injuries.

DR RANDERA: Can you just tell us what is your disability, your physical
disability?

MR MOLOTSI: My left foot just on the vein was shot.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Molotsi thank you so much for coming to us and relating
your story that happened to you, that happened to your friend, to Mr Papi
Boshego to us. We really appreciate it and we will take up the things you
left with us and hopefully there will be some light shed on it. And may
we wish you all the best also with your injury and with your life ahead.
May I say to Mrs Boshego, the mother of Papi, that we really cry with
you, the pain and the anguish

HRV/813	must/...

	9	

must have been very severe and very hard on you. May you find peace.
Thank you for coming to us today. Thank you ever so much. You may step
down.

	------------------------

