
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.08.96	NAME: MAPHAKA PLAATJIE MOSIA

CASE: 831 - SEBOKENG

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: I greet you Mr Mosia. We welcome you here. Before you tell
us your story we would request you to stand up so as to take an oath.

MAPHAKA PLAATJIE MOSIA: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: I am the person who will lead you as you give us your
evidence. Mr Mosia can you please tell us what happened on the 21st of
April 1993, it was at about 8 or 9 o'clock in the evening, what happened
to your son Ouboy Joseph Mosia?

MR MOSIA: In 1993 I was at home sleeping. I was actually preparing myself
to sleep. As I was preparing myself I heard a loud noise outside and I
quickly woke up. And I went to the fifth house from my house where Anna
Kheswa was staying. Ouboy, Joseph my son asked me to go to Mrs Kheswa to
watch television. That was on the night vigil of Mr Chris Hani. We
quickly ran to the place and things were just mixed up. On my way to that
house I saw a Hippo parking outside. People were also gathered. I got
into the house, I saw people lying on the floor. It was two children, one
sister and Ouboy's friend. I talked to the police. I said we tried to
take Ouboy's shoes off, the police said no please leave them on. We left
the house, we went outside. We stood there quite a long time to assess
the situation and we were told that a car came and it started shooting at
people. I never saw it with my own eyes. I went back home and we went to
bed.

HRV/831	The/...

	2	

	The next morning we woke up to go and have a look at our dead. When we
went to the place of the scene they were not there anymore. We went all
over to search for them. Until at one stage we decided to go to a police
station at Houtkop and we found them at the government mortuary.

MS SEROKE: Mr Mosia what was Ouboy doing in 1993, was he a student, was
he working?

MR MOSIA: He was working.

MS SEROKE: Did he belong to any political organisation?

MR MOSIA: No he didn't.

MS SEROKE: Now this unrest that was outside, was everything happening at
a place where he was watching TV?

MR MOSIA: Yes, yes at the place where he was watching TV.

MS SEROKE: Have you enquired thereafter what happened, what led to the
unrest in the house?

MR MOSIA: No the unrest was from outside. They were just sitting watching
TV.

MS SEROKE: So the people who perpetrated this act are not known?

MR MOSIA: No they are not known.

MS SEROKE: Even the car that they were driving nobody took the
registration numbers?

MR MOSIA: No, nobody. It had already drove past.

MS SEROKE: Where were the police from?

MR MOSIA: The police, when we got to the place of the scene the police
were from within the house and when I tried to get inside they asked me
as to what I was doing. I said I want to take his shoes off. They said
no, leave him, don't take the shoes off. They said we shouldn't touch
them at all.

MS SEROKE: Did the police arrive?

HRV/831	MR MOSIA:/...

	3	

MR MOSIA: Remember I was asleep and I was called into the place of the
scene and at the time I went to the house the people had already gathered
there and the Hippo was already parking outside.

MS SEROKE: I have been hearing this word "Kwayoko"(?), what kind of a car
is this one?

MR MOSIA: It's this awful car, the children don't like it at all.

MS SEROKE: Is it a Hippo?

MR MOSIA: Yes it's a Hippo.

MS SEROKE: Were there people who witnessed the incident?

MR MOSIA: Yes people saw the events of the evening.

MS SEROKE: Do you know them?

MR MOSIA: No, some of them I do not know. They were just onlookers who
were coming to witness what took place.

MS SEROKE: You wanted to remove the deceased shoes, why did you want to
take the shoes?

MR MOSIA: He was dead and in our tradition when a person has died we take
the shoes off so that the feet do not get swollen.

MS SEROKE: So you were only following the tradition?

MR MOSIA: Yes.

MS SEROKE: And they refused you to take the shoes off?

MR MOSIA: Yes they said we shouldn't touch them at all.

MS SEROKE: Did you try to call an ambulance?

MR MOSIA: No we were - we didn't know what to do. I don't know what
happened to the mother as well. We were just mixed up, we were going up
and down and the house as well where the incident took place was in total
tatters. We didn't know what to do.

MS SEROKE: Was the issue taken to the court of law?

HRV/831	MR MOSIA:/...

	4	

MR MOSIA: No it was never taken to the court of law.

MS SEROKE: Thank you.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mantata do you have any questions?

MR MOSIA: This boy was already working and I am not working as you see
me, and he had three children. I don't know what kind of help can you
assist me with because the children are still at school.

MR MANTATA: My question is the people who went to sister Anna's house
...(intervention)

MR MOSIA: No my son was alone, he was one his own. He requested me to
give him permission to go and watch television because it was the night
vigil of Mr Chris Hani, and when he arrived there he found his friend
there and that is the time when the accident occurred. I cannot say
anything further because I was sleeping. I can't testify on many issues,
I don't want to lie. I don't want to say I saw this and saw that.

MR MANTATA: My question was actually with regard to the next day or the
following days. How many families were attacked?

MR MOSIA: From my house it was my house and then the third house was also
attacked. We only rushed to the other house not being aware that there
was already a tragedy at this other house.

MR MANTATA: Shortly, you only know of the families that were in your
street, you don't know of any possibility of other houses maybe in the
other streets?

MR MOSIA: Which families are you referring to Sir?

MR MANTATA: Normally the next day if a tragedy had befallen we would ask
you how did you sleep and then you might have been in a position as to
get information as to

HRV/831	how/...

	5	

how many families were attacked?

MR MOSIA: Yes. The next day we only heard stories that so many families
were attacked.

MR MANTATA: I thank you.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mr Mantata. Professor Meiring?

PROF MEIRING: Only one question. There were so many people involved that
night, so many people were killed, what can the Truth Commission
recommend to help heal the community of the pain of that day? You said
that the children, your children still need help to go to school. We have
taken note of that. But thinking of the street and of the whole community
is there anything we can recommend?

MR MOSIA: I don't know what the government can do now, I really do not
know, and I cannot give terms as to what kind of help can we be given. I
do not really know what to say.

DR RANDERA: Thank you Professor Meiring. Mr Mosia can you just tell us,
you said Ouboy Joseph Mosia left three children, how old are they?

MR MOSIA: I do not understand the ages, I can't really tell you their
ages but they follow one another. I can't remember the dates. As men we
don't take years into consideration a lot, the mothers do take care of
such issues.

DR RANDERA: And you say your son was working, what was his work?

MR MOSIA: He was working at Duncanville Factories. It was a long time
working there, he was sort-of a boilermaker at the factory, but the
factory was still small, it's now big. They were welding, they did a lot
of welding work.

DR RANDERA: Was he involved in any political activity, was he a member of
any organisation?

HRV/831	MR MOSIA:/...

	6	

MR MOSIA: He was an ANC member. The elderly people cannot tell you
exactly what their children were doing but I only heard that he was an
ANC member.

DR RANDERA: Mr Mosia thank you very, very much for coming here today. We
heard earlier on from Anna already about what happened on that night
inside her house. Not only did you lose a son but the children also lost
their father, and they of course have been orphaned by this tragic event.
I sometimes wonder how many of our children have been orphaned and if it
wasn't for the community, extended family network that there is what cost
that would be to our nation. I thank you for coming today and sharing
your experiences and we have heard you and we have noted you. Thank you
very much.

MR MOSIA: I thank you.

	----------------------

	

