
	1

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS & ANSWERS

DATE:		05.08.96 SEBOKENG

CASE NUMBER:	901 NAME: LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE (s.s.)

MISS JOY SEROKE: I greet you, Mr Ramohoase. We welcome you on this day.
You are here to tell us the events of 1960 in Sharpeville when people
where killed at the police station in Sharpeville. When I look at your
statement I see that at that time you were 33 years of age, is that true?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Yes, I think so.

MISS JOY SEROKE: I am going to request you to briefly tell us what
happened on that day.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: On that day, as stories have been told, we
didn't believe that this would happen but when this happened we were
stopped on our way and we realised that it was true, the story that has
been told. We tried to go back but those who were stopping us on the
roads said no we have to go to the police station, we want to resolve
this issue about the pass. They asked me where my pass was because I left
it, I said no I don't have it with me, I left it at home but truly it was
in my pocket. We jumped on our bicycles and we went off. I realised that
I wouldn't make it with the bicycle. I took it back home and then I
walked. When we got to the scene a large group of people were there. It
was between the police station and the clinic. I wanted to be at the
forefront but because of the large crowd I couldn't force my way through
and that is where I decided to stand where I was until such time that -
because we were

HRV/901	told/...



	2	

told that at two o'clock we would get a response. I can't remember
whether was it two o'clock or not because I didn't have a watch but now
the soldiers were now present in the police station yard. There was a
saracen parking there and the soldiers were right behind the saracen
pointing their guns at us. We saw a white person jumping over the
saracen. He got inside and then he pulled the door above him. After that
I heard gunshots. I don't know what happened but I was on the ground and
I decided that I would run until my legs go off me but I didn't know what
happened. People were just trampling on me. I tried to push them but I
couldn't and now this leg was now troubling me and I decided to sit down.
I said no ways, I cannot carry on. We were picked up. Mr Morake was among
the people who picked us up with his car. He was a messenger of court.
That is the car I was drove with. We were dropped at the Vereeniging
Hospital and we spent a time there. After quite some time we were taken
by other cars to Baragwanath Hospital. We spent the whole time in
Baragwanath and we were released in August month. I was still not feeling
well but I was much better. When I was now working I wouldn't stay a long
period in the employment. I would tell them my problem and they would say
if we knew before we would never employ you. And I realised that I have
to pack my clothes now, there is nothing that I leave on. I have to go
out and go and seek for another employment but every time I got a new
employment I wouldn't tell them that I was shot but as soon as they
discover that I had been shot they let me go. And every time I would lose
my job. Now leg was really destroying my future. My children were
starving and every time I go for employment I would not tell the people
that I am sick but every time I go to the

HRV/901	hospital/...



	3	

hospital they would discover that no I have been through this terrible
pain since a long time ago and God helped me, I was now at Nedbank (?). I
had been to many factories. I was at Nedbank, that is where God took
mercy upon me and then I got a pension.

MISS JOY SEROKE: I want to thank you, sir. In your statement you were
telling us that people told you that you don't have to go to work. Do you
still remember which organisation those people belonged to?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: No. There were organisations present but I
wasn't so involved in politics. I didn't even know which party went for
which ideology. I know for a fact that there were parties.

MISS JOY SEROKE: In other words you do not know which organisation was
organising the stay away on that day and the burning of cars.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: No. I don't want to lie, I don't know which
organisation it was.

MISS JOY SEROKE: In your statement you further say you were not involved
in politics.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Yes, not at all.

MISS JOY SEROKE: Now tell me how did you feel when you were told to carry
a pass?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: To carry a pass. Yes, I was satisfied for a
pass because it was law.

MISS JOY SEROKE: So you were just abiding by the law.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Yes.

MISS JOY SEROKE: In other words you didn't like when they said you should
burn your pass.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: No, I didn't understand them.

MISS JOY SEROKE: Now if you didn't like to burn your pass

HRV/901	where/...



	4	

where were you going to?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: No, I wanted to hear this message at that
time because we were told that at two o'clock the big boss is going to
address us regarding the pass issue. So we wanted to hear this message.

MISS JOY SEROKE: Now even if you were not involved in politics now when
you saw people dying how did you feel after witnessing the killing of
people, how did you feel?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: I was deeply hurt. But there was nothing I
could do because it was law and I didn't know what would happen really.

MISS JOY SEROKE: Now did you hear about the order that people should be
shot?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: No, I never heard an order.

MISS JOY SEROKE: You say after being injured they dumped you on the green
grass outside the police station. Now being so badly injured, to be
thrown on that grass, did you think at that stage it was justified?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: No, they threw us at the hospital not on
the grass. There wasn't much I can do because I was listening to these
pains, I was feeling these pains.

MISS JOY SEROKE: Thank you very much, sir. I want to take everything back
to our Chairman.

COMMISSIONER: Thank you. Any further questions?

DR RANDERA: Mr Ramahoase you say that you were not a member of any
political organisation and you went by the law. But can you tell us a
little about the atmosphere. Did you know before people stopped you on
that day and said you shouldn't go to work, was there discussion in the
community, on the streets, about this action that was going to be taken
and as

HRV/901	we know/...



	5	

we know that was organised by the Pan Africanist Congress. MR LEBITSA
SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Such a talk was rumoured but as I have mentioned, I
wasn't interested in that and I didn't believe that they would end up
doing that.

DR RANDERA: Can we just talk a little about after you were taken to the
police station and then to the hospital. Can you tell us a little about
the treatment that you received, how were you treated as such and what
were your injuries.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: My hip was injured on the left-hand side.
This bullet penetrated and then it went from behind. I still have these
wounds even now. Now you want me, sir, to tell you the kind of treatment
that we got at the hospital.

DR RANDERA: Yes please.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: I must tell you, sir, we were not ill
treated at all. From the day we were admitted until we were released. I
only heard from people who were discharged, you know when they were
discharged from the hospital police vans would be waiting for them
outside. I couldn't see anything because I was lying on my back facing
upwards. I only heard people when they were saying the police vans are
outside for those who are being discharged. DR RANDERA: So are you saying
the police were there and were questioning people who had been shot and
injured?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: The police did not arrest them. Are you
saying at the hospital, sir?

DR RANDERA: Yes, sir.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: I say it is a rumour, I didn't see them. I
only heard. I was lying on my back but the people who were talking kept
on saying people who were being discharged were taken into the police
vans. That was

HRV/901	just/...



	6	

just a talk I heard. I didn't see it with my own eyes.

DR RANDERA: So you yourself were not questioned afterwards?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Statements were taken because they asked us
how we got injured and then we told them everything.

DR RANDERA: My last question, you have heard me say how this incident had
a great impact on the history of our country. Can you tell us how it
changed your life.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Can you please repeat your question, sir.

DR RANDERA: I said earlier on when I introduced you that the Sharpeville
incident had an enormous impact on what happened in our country and how
the world looked upon our country. How did it change your life?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: My life changed. I led a miserable life.
You know my feelings changed altogether. But I didn't know what kind of
help would I give myself and I was satisfied, I said I have to be
satisfied because it is something that happened to me, I am helpless, I
can't do anything for myself.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much, sir.

COMMISSIONER: Mr Ramahoase, we want to thank you.

PROFESSOR MEIRING: Father Ramahoase, I just want to ask one or two
questions. The first one is you said that you did receive some
compensation afterwards. How large was that? How much money did you get
afterwards?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: The compensation that I got was R88.

PROFESSOR MEIRING: And afterwards were you able to - you told us that you
were able to get some work afterwards but every time the people realised
that you were involved in the

HRV/901	shooting/...



	7	

shooting you lost your job. But were you able through the years to carry
on with work, to care for your family or was it difficult to care for
your wife and children?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: It was difficult, sir, to get employment. I
have already explained that it was up to the time when I got my pension.
Because I have never got any stable employment at all.

PROFESSOR MEIRING: Thank you. And the last question, Father, is now today
you have come to the Truth Commission. What is in your heart, what do you
think the Truth Commission can do for you being an old man sitting
telling your story to us today?

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: I don't know what would I request from the
Commission but the real matter is I want to thank the Commission for any
kind of help that they can offer me. I cannot dictate terms. I will never
be dissatisfied with anything that I will get from the Commission, any
kind of assistance.

PROFESSOR MEIRING: Thank you ever so much.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: I also thank you.

COMMISSIONER: I already said that I want to thank you but I didn't
realise that Mr Meiring had a few questions. I want to say to you thank
you very much for your presence. The surprising thing is that you were
not involved in politics and one other thing you were really keen to
abide by the law, even if the law was harassing people. Even in those
conditions you deemed it fit to follow the law and then you were injured.
We have to remember at all times the nation that many people who suffered
are people like you, they are people who didn't want to fight the
government. You were just an ordinary person trying to abide by the law

HRV/901	and/...



	8	

and that is where you met your fate. And after such a terrible experience
if you are correct when you say they paid you R88.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Yes, that is correct, sir. Yes, sir, that
is R88.

COMMISSIONER: We know that the value of the rand at that time was still
okay but R88 really.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: Yes, it was R88.

COMMISSIONER: And that was not the end of your harassment because you
didn't want to fight anybody. You just wished to work. But every time
they discovered that you had been involved in the Sharpeville shooting
they continually harassed you by chasing you away. I hope that we who
long for a new kind of South Africa will be aware of what we are hearing,
that it was ordinary people, often apolitical people, at Sharpeville who
were shot, who were injured, who were killed. And given compensation that
was contemptable. And made to suffer even afterwards. I hope that we who
listen to this kind of thing will want to commit ourselves that we will
never allow this kind of thing ever to happen again in our country. To
place such a value on human life must be something that we determine will
never happen again. We want to thank you sir. We will try because you
didn't give us any indication as to your specific needs but as a
Commission we will try to see what kind of help will we offer you. We
want to thank you.

MR LEBITSA SOLOMON RAMOHOASE: I also thank you.

	------------------------

