	1	G SEKAMOENG


	1	G SEKAMOENG

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: GLORIA SEKAMOENG

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

DR RANDERA: Gloria we are going back to May 1993 and really what you are
going to be talking about is what happened, I presume not many yards
outside this hall, at the University itself. I am actually going to be
leading you in helping you tell your story - before we do that could you
just stand and take the oath.

GLORIA SEKAMOENG: (sworn states)

DR RANDERA: Gloria, is you can just in your words and time tell us what
happened in May 1993 at the campus of the University of North West, at
the time I presume it was still called the University of Bophuthatswana,
or Unibo, as it was known. Thank you.

MS SEKAMOENG: In May, 1993 I was assaulted by the police, because there
was going to be a student march, the students of this university, the
University of Bophuthatswana. When the students were still next to the
great hall, the police came and they started throwing teargas to disperse
the students.

	We took different directions, we wanted to hide ourselves, because of
the teargas and the police were now chasing us. While running away, two
policemen came to me. They were very close and then we were also tired of
running. The one policeman, and I tried to ask for forgiveness, but he
didn't understand, he shot me with a rubber bullet on the MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	G SEKAMOENG

head and I fell.

	While on the ground one came and he had a batton and he started
assaulting me with this batton. My thighs were really affected, because
even now even one of my thighs are not working very well. I still have
the bruises, that I have been assaulted - the two are not equal.

	After that the police said we were arrested, even if I didn't understand
why I was arrested. A person tried to take me to the hospital with his
care and they pulled me and said I was arrested I have to go to the
prison.

	And they sacrificed to pick me up with the police vans and they took me
to the hospital, because they said I was under arrest. I was guarded at
the hospital because I was under arrest.

	Some of the students came to visit me at the hospital and they requested
that I should be removed from the Bapelong Hospital, because the hospital
didn't have enough equipment to treat me.

	I was then sent to Victoria. I spent a day and the following morning I
was sent to the Seding Clinic, that is where I stayed for three weeks.

	While in hospital I couldn't speak, I lost my speech. I couldn't walk, I
was just like a baby. I couldn't eat

myself, I was fed. I was even taken to the toilet, because I couldn't do
anything on my own.

	I would request my mother to carry on, because I can't carry on anymore.
She might give a better explanation.

DR RANDERA: Gloria I would love for your mother to speak but I am afraid
that we don't have a statement from your mother so we have to stay with
your statement. Is that ok?

MS SEKAMOENG: Yes, that is ok. Because even if she didn't MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	3	G SEKAMOENG

give a statement in, she knows about what happened to me. Because by the
time I was in the hospital she was always with me.

DR RANDERA: If we need to take any additional information we will go back
to your mother and take a statement from her at a later stage.

	Are you ok to answer some questions?

MS SEKAMOENG: Yes, I will be able to.

DR RANDERA: Gloria, I want us again to go back. 1993 was a period of
intense activity in Bophuthatswana as it was then called. We had a
situation of members of an opposition party, challenging Mr Cronje, one
of the Ministers at that time. We had a situation where we had an
international monitoring group, coming into the country and at times
being refused entry into Bophuthatswana.

	We also had at the Medical School in Garankua a mass uprising by the
students where they hijacked buses and in fact burn the buses.

	And then, of course, what happened at your own University, you were one
of the victims of that and several other students also ended up in
hospital, as you

will remember.

	I am just wondering if you could just, to me and to everybody else, give
us a picture of what was actualy happening on that campus, on that day.
Was it that the police just came on and started attacking people without
any provocation, or was there something else going that made the police
came on to the campus in the first place.

MS SEKAMOENG: Yes, the police attacked us for a reason, because on that
day there was going to be a student march to take the memorandum to the
parliament. And the students MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	4	G SEKAMOENG

were gathered, preparing themselves to leave for the parliament so they
could hand in the memorandum. They were waiting, singing the freedom
songs and that was when the police came to stop. Because they were
against the march. They didn't want the march to take place.

	They said they students do not have to leave the campus to hand in the
memorandum at the parliament offices.

	That is the reason that make the police attack the students. The
students wanted to go out of the campus, but the police didn't allow them
to.

	I don't really know what was written in the memorandum, because by that
time I wasn't very active in the students' movements.

	I only got the injuries, because in 1993 it was my first year here at
the University. By then I didn't know much about the events here at
school. Therefore, I would say I didn't know what was in the memorandum.

DR RANDERA: Thank you, I have no other questions Chairperson.

MR MALAN: Just to confirm, did you say it was on the 7th of May? What
date did this take place?

MS SEKAMOENG: Yes, it was on the 7th of May.

MR MALAN: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Gloria and your mother, we thank you for being here today
and we really shared the experience that you have been through. You know,
when you go to school and try to study in your first year and meet such
problems you ask yourself, is this really a school? Well that is the
situation we found ourselves in, because of the past laws.

	We want to say the problems that you had or that the problems that you
still have as you mentioned, that your MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	5	G SEKAMOENG

thighs are not equal and that you were shocked, we will try and see what
shall we do to help you Gloria Sekamoeng, so that you can further your
studies like anybody else.

	We want to thank you that you were today.

	---------------------------	

