
	1	A SEKHOACHA

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	12.11.1996	NAME:	A SEKHOACHA

CASE: - 		KRUGERSDORP

DAY 2

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: We welcome you all to the second day of our hearings.
Yesterday those of you who were here, we dealt with violations that took
place mostly in the Carletonville and Khutsong areas. Today we are going
to focus on the violations that took place in Mohlakeng, Toekomsrus and
Swanieville. Some of these cases are related to police shootings and some
of them are related to inter-organisational conflict. Basically, between
the conflict between the IFP and the ANC.

	The Commission being an independent body and evenhanded has tried very
much to get a balanced picture of the conflict, but we regret that we
have not been successful in that we did not have statements from the IFP.
Nevertheless, we are still going to try to get those statements because
it is not only the hearings that are important for us, but it is
important for us to gather as many statements from the people as
possible. So, we feel, perhaps, we will be able to reach out to the other
parties.

	Two of our Commissioners have joined us this morning and I would like to
introduce our panel. Starting from the right we have Professor Piet
Meiring who is a member of the Reparation and Rehabilitation Committee.
Then we have Yasmin Sooka, Deputy Chairperson of the Human Rights
Violations Committee. On my left we have Dr Randera who is

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	2	A SEKHOACHA

also a Human Rights Violations Committee member and, of course, I am
Joyce Seroke, who is a member of the Human Rights Violations Committee.

	We shall now begin and we will call our first witness. Our first witness
is Agnes Sekhoacha and Dr Randera is going to do the oath. I will hand
over to Dr Randera.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Sekhoacha, good morning.

MRS SEKHOACHA: Good morning, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Are you well?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I am well, because I am here, God has blessed me.

DR RANDERA: I welcome you and I want you to feel as relaxed as possible.
You have come to talk about something that happened many, many years ago,
1963, but before we come to that will you please stand to take the oath.

MRS SEKHOACHA: (Duly sworn in, states).

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mam, will you please sit down.

CHAIRPERSON: Professor Piet Meiring is going to lead this witness. Over
to you Piet.

PROF MEIRING: Mrs Sekhoacha, from my side too, very welcome and I do hope
that you find it a healing experience to be with us today. You are going
to tell us your story, an incident that happened 33 years ago. At that
stage you were a young girl of 20 years of age and it is the story of
what happened to you and to Maria, who was at your side. Just before you
tell the story, can you give us the date when it happened?

MRS SEKHOACHA: May I talk?

PROF MEIRING: Yes please.

MRS SEKHOACHA: It was in 1963, I was staying in Leshwana at the old
location. I was still a child. I was schooling at

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	A SEKHOACHA

Manseville High at that time. In our yard, there were people who were
residing there because in those times people use to build shacks in the
yard. We use to stay in peace. You could not just call them anything. You
could take them as your relative. Maria Gobganie's parents were staying
in one of the shacks in the yard. We were the same age, Maria and I, but
I was in 1943 on the 1st of January.

	It was during examination period in November. We were doing the same
standard, but in different classes. She was in A, I was in the B class.
We were on our way from school. We use to travel by bus in the morning
and in the afternoon at four o' clock. During examinations, this bus
would not come. The reason being we would finish quickly and we would
come back home earlier. It was the last subject that we were to write on
that day and it was Afrikaans. We were travelling along the Monument Road
so that we could be able to catch the train to go home. We were quite
hungry on that day if I can remember well. We rested a while under the
shade because it was quite a hot day.

	She took three stones and she was playing. It was a game that we
enjoyed, playing with these stones while walking. When we approached the
Paul Kruger statue, we were attracted by bees. Whilst we were standing
there and watching the swarm of bees, we could not see that there were
policemen who were standing around there. We were chatting and our
laughter was the result of that conflict. We were laughing heartily and
we were watching the swarm of bees as they were flying about.

	The two policemen emerged and as they emerged they did not give us a
chance. They talked to us in Afrikaans. They said what are you laughing
at Kaffirs. We were dressed in

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	A SEKHOACHA

black and white uniform at that time. We were scared because at those
times it was a fearsome period because the white children would beat us
up every day. They took us, they were dressed in a khaki uniform. They
had long rifles. My school uniform was torn apart. They beat us, they
assaulted us. I was so scared, I was frightened. I did not feel that I
was walking on the ground. The one was holding Maria and the other one
was holding me. We were taken to a cell that I cannot remember even
today, but we found ourselves in a prison.

	In this prison, it was a strange small house. Inside it there was a
palm, a plank and a bucket and a few blankets that were thrown on the
floor. This white man, he is not the one who opened, the one who caught
us. He opened and then we went inside. He closed the cell once we were
inside. He said that we are going to cut off your tails today. We looked
at each other the moment he said that. He beat us. The painful part of it
is whenever he beat the other one, this plank that was separating us, it
would injure you and should you fall, you would be in trouble. We were
bleeding. It was a huge white man who was holding me and he was beating
us up. Thereafter, he asked us, what were you laughing at. Whilst I was
trying to explain what we were laughing at he hit me finally and I fell.
When I fell I lost consciousness and when I revived he was not there
anymore. When I stood up I saw Maria standing in front of me.

CHAIRPERSON: Okay, Agnes. Drink some water, Agnes, and please take your
time.

MRS SEKHOACHA: As Maria was standing there, I looked at her. We could not
talk. At that time I was swollen and

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	A SEKHOACHA

when she was looking like me, swollen as well.

	We were arrested round about one o' clock. Round about four o' clock we
were still sitting there and we were hungry. We did not even have money
when we went to school and we were rushing to get home so that we could
get something to eat. There was a dish that they pushed underneath the
door. This door would make room for this small dish and it was a silver
dish with dry porridge. We could not eat such a dry porridge because at
that time even our mouths were full of blood. We were not saying
anything, we were just looking at each other. Nobody was talking to the
other.

	At that time I heard a bunch of keys opening doors, but I did not see
the other cells. I only saw this particular cell I was in. Then somebody
finally opened our door. That person asked us why did you not eat? We
kept quiet. He said Kaffirs, I am going to cut your tails off. He took
this dish and he took it away. It was the first day.

	On the second day a different person came. This person opened the door,
he did nothing. He just took Maria Gobganie. I could not even ask at that
time or say anything. He took Maria and put her in a different cell. That
is what I think because that is when I heard a bunch of keys opening the
other cell. I was left alone in this cell. I laid there alone and
whenever they would push this porridge in, I would not eat it. They would
come and take it away. We were served this lunchtime and at four o' clock
again. When I tried to open the tap to get some water because I wanted to
wash the blood clots in my mouth, but only found out that there was no
water running from the tap. I just swallowed because there was nothing
else I could do. KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	A SEKHOACHA

I could not sleep. I was squatting, still dressed in my uniform. I could
not even use the blankets because they were so dirty. I was not actually
in a deep sleep. I could not fall asleep and I had a headache at that
time. I felt dizzy all the time and I kept on trying to see if I could
get some water, but, unfortunately, there was no water. That was on the
second day and I was dizzy at that moment. I was not aware as to what was
happening to Maria at that time.

	On the third day a black man walked in round about eight o' clock. He
was a black policeman. He wanted to know what are you doing here? I could
not answer him. He just closed the door. Round about two o' clock I heard
the bunch of keys again and when I got the bunch of keys, they opened and
I just told myself that today I am dead. A white, tall policeman opened
the door and said to me, get away here, fuck off, and that is when I left.

	When I left I did not even know which direction to use. I did not use
the direction to the station, I used the opposite direction. Then I
realised after some time that I was getting lost and people were looking
at me, surprised. At that time people did not even care for one another.
Then I decided to turn back and I followed another gentleman. I asked him
for money. He did not have time for me, he did not care much. He wanted
to know where I was from. I wanted to explain to him and I just needed a
fare from him. He said I must follow him and he bought me a ticket. I
managed to catch a train here at Krugersdorp. I got off at Leopardsvlei.
This gentleman took a different route to use the taxis. I went had to
walk home in that state. We had to walk all the time because it was
nearby. I was resting

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	A SEKHOACHA

all the time. Since I was arrested on that day from school my uniform was
stained with blood and I was feeling very ill, but I managed to get home.

	When I got home I found out that our parents ran up and about. They did
not know where to report and there were no telephones available at that
time. We do not know whether our parents did go to report at the school
or not, but Maria Gobganie's parents also went out to look for her. I
thought that they released Maria Gobganie first and then me after, but
only to find out that Maria never came back. When I came back my father
collapsed and when he collapsed, then they tried to wake him up. They
asked me what happened and I explained what happened. They gave me some
water to wash myself up. I had some injuries in my body. My left rib,
even today, I cannot even do washing for my children. It was injured, it
was painful.

	Maria Gobganie's parents were not there. They went to look for her,
where is she. Whilst we were sitting there they came back and relatives
were called, aunts and uncles. They were still alive then, in order to
discuss this incident. Maria Gobganie never showed up at that time. I
told them that since they took her to a different cell, but only found
out that they will release me. That was the last time I saw her.
Investigations did not go any further. At that time even when you tried
to investigate something, it would be in vane. My father tried and at
that time everybody was scared of the policemen because there was a
possibility that one would land in prison at that time. My father's
health deteriorated since then because, and he is mentally disturbed
until today.

	I even got married with this painful rib, injured rib. KRUGERSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	A SEKHOACHA

I cannot even do washing properly. I have to get assistance from somebody
and I do not have enough finances to pay that person. My tastebuds are
not functioning properly. I cannot eat peanuts or apples.

	This affected me until I got employment, but even at that employment I
was beaten up by the police. That was because I was trying to fight
oppression on behalf of the physciatric patients who were being
ill-treated by the hospital. When I sat down with the management for them
to handle the patients well, that is when I was assaulted by the police.
For 20 years I could not even get a house.

	I suffered from 1991 until 1994 when my child was arrested at the field.
This unfortunateness has been with me since then till 1994. My son was
playing at the field on a Sunday. I had no food on that particular
Sunday. A friend had given me some spinach in order to feed my family
because I was the breadwinner and nobody could help me.

	I had a son who was doing dental technology, but when I was dismissed he
could not further his studies because of lack of finance. Today he is a
drunkard. He cannot go further with his studies.

	I saw a police van coming. There were four children and the fifth one
was my son. I was shocked when the policeman knocked. I could not see my
child properly because I was frightened. I asked the policeman what did
this child do? They said he did nothing, but he is injured. I cried, but
the one policeman said there is no use in crying because you will not be
able to hear exactly what happened. These children were taken by white
policemen at the field. They were chasing them around with horses. They
took them and threw them by the dam, this white policeman

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	9	A SEKHOACHA

whose name is Botha. When they got to the dam these policemen got them to
be kicked by the horses. Your child has been so seriously injured because
he demanded to know what they did wrong. They tied him and they said that
you are the one who is going to be thrown into the dam. They tortured
them and they were setting sticks with them and pulling them with their
private parts. They did all the horrible things to them. We are telling
you this because we are already from there. I asked them as to how did
you know that they were there. They said when these horses were running
towards the dam, kicking these boys and your boy was being slipped, tied
to a horse. There is a child who saw this and went to report it to his
father. His father phoned the police.

	I requested the police to go with me, but they said that when they got
to that farm, that farmer's wife said there will not be a Kaffir who
would come into my house, rather go and get white policemen. They said
this will not help. You will have to go and lay a charge. I did that, but
my child is helpless. He is not studying. He is doing standard seven, but
he is helpless. He cannot even help me with gardening. I gave them the
statement and then I went to a Government doctor to get a referring
letter so that this child can get treatment from Doctor Morula.	

	Doctor Morula treated him for three weeks, but he could not walk or do
anything for himself. He could not walk, he could not see. The case did
not proceed in court, but I reported this to Martin Nswelengie who was a
Reporter so that he must reveal that in the newspaper media. I was
concerned what will be this child's future in his state. Till today I
never managed to proceed with the case.

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	10	A SEKHOACHA

The policemen came to me and asked me do you know that Botha is a Law
Official, you are wasting your time. You either go and talk to him for
him to be able to buy your sons spectacles. I cannot do that because I do
not have the proof that he will give me the finance or he will buy these
spectacles. So, then suggested that I should go to Randburg Court in June
in 1964. They said I had a Commissioner and Botha to try and solve your
problem inside the house to see what we can do for your child when we see
that he has been injured seriously and he might be blinded for life. I
waited until twelve o' clock, until today there was never a case, a court
case.

	He is just a crippled child. He cannot study in the evenings.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much Mrs Sekhoacha for your testimony. You
have been telling us two stories. Maybe we can talk about the first story
first, what happened 33 years ago to yourself and I would like to ask you
a number of questions on that, to clarify that. Afterward we will turn to
the story, what happened to your son and there will be a number of
questions about that. If you can just rethink that incident in 1963 when
you and Maria, your friend, were arrested by the police. The first thing
I want to know is do you know the date? You said it happened in 1963, but
the month and the day, do you know that?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I can only remember the month. It was in November because
in November we write our examinations, but I do not remember the date
exactly, but it was in November, towards the end of November.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. The second thing I want to know is
were there any witnesses when you and Maria were

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	A SEKHOACHA

accosted and taken away? Are there any witnesses of the scene?

MRS SEKHOACHA: People who were passing by, we did not know them because
this was a busy road. At that time, whenever somebody was arrested by the
police, you would run away. Nobody wanted to be a witness. People were
scared for their lives. I do not think there was ever a witness.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you so much. About Maria, your friend, who probably
died. Do you know what has happened to her family? Are they still in your
area or have they left?

MRS SEKHOACHA: At the moment I am married, I am staying in Mohlakeng.
Maria's family originates from Zeerust. As I have mentioned in my
statement, people were coming from all over, as far as Lesotho. You would
not ask as to where are they from. You were just happy to accommodate
them in your yard and you would live in harmony. That was the problem.
PROF MEIRING: Thank you. Now, again, talking about yourself. After that
horrible experience were you able to go back to school to finish with
your studies?

MRS SEKHOACHA: No, I never managed. I only went as far as Form three. I
intended to study towards Law, but my father who was supporting me was
mentally disturbed and could not support me furthermore to further my
studies.

PROF MEIRING: Was he ...

MRS SEKHOACHA: He passed away in that state, being mentally disturbed
because of me.

PROF MEIRING: Was it because of what happened to you that he was mentally
disturbed?

MRS SEKHOACHA: That is true. My father use to love me very much and he
had high aims as far as I am concerned. When he saw me, blood-soaked, he
was the first one who collapsed.

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	12	A SEKHOACHA

As I have said, he collapsed due to this.

PROF MEIRING: And then afterwards you became a nurse?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I became a nurse. That is when I decided to be a nurse
because I could see the ill-treatment that people were given in hospital.
When I sat down with management in the hospital to try and address this
illtreatment, that is when I was dismissed and assaulted by the police.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you, but you did marry eventually, you have children
of your own and were you able to?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I became a nurse whilst married and had children as well.

PROF MEIRING: How big is your family?

MRS SEKHOACHA: It is at Mohlakeng in Randfontein at the moment.

PROF MEIRING: How many?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I have got five children?

PROF MEIRING: Five children. Now, let us turn to the other story, what
happened to your son. Is he the oldest or in the middle or the youngest
of your children?

MRS SEKHOACHA: He is the last born. At the moment he is doing Form one.
He is the last born.

PROF MEIRING: And was he severely injured or can he go on with his life?

MRS SEKHOACHA: What I do not know clearly is if you asked him to help you
with ordinary things like garden, he cannot and he cannot study even at
night. Even when you look at me, when you look at him you can see that he
is semi-blinded. Even at school he has got problems with that.

PROF MEIRING: So you and your family are still in need of medical
attention?

MRS SEKHOACHA: Yes we do, quite a lot. We need a lot of

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	13	A SEKHOACHA

medical treatment because even myself, I cannot even do washing for my
children since I was beaten in prison. I was married in this status, my
rib is still giving me problems. I cannot take care of my children like
any normal mother.

PROF MEIRING: In your statement you said that you also have problems with
your teeth. Is that correct?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I do not eat peanuts and apples even when I envy them.
Sometimes when I wake up all my set of teeth would shake. I do try and
treat them, but in vane.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you. A last question. You said that your child was
treated by a doctor and I did not catch the name. Was it Morula?

MRS SEKHOACHA: It is Doctor Morula.

PROF MEIRING: Morula. Where does he practice?

MRS SEKHOACHA: His surgery is in Mohlakeng. In the corner of Lembetie
Street in Mohlakeng.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much Mrs Sekhoacha. Those were my questions,
but some of my colleagues, I am sure, would like to add a number of
questions from their side.

CHAIRPERSON: Yasmin.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Joyce. Mama, I am going to ask you a few questions
about the first incident that took place in 1963. How old were you and
Maria at the time this happened?

MRS SEKHOACHA: As I have said we were born in the same year, but I was a
month older than her. I was born on the 1st of January 1943.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. Could you tell me, I just want to make absolutely
sure, that you were kept in, you were kept in the cells for approximately
three days. Is that right?

MRS SEKHOACHA: Yes, it is true, three days.

MS SOOKA: But the last time that you saw Maria was on the

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	14	A SEKHOACHA

first day when the two of you were ...?

MRS SEKHOACHA: It was on the second day. That is when they took Maria to
a different cell and they left me alone in this cell.

MS SOOKA: And that was the last time that you saw her?

MRS SEKHOACHA: That was the last time I saw Maria Gobganie. MS SOOKA: At
any time in the three days did you hear anything from any other cell? Do
you think she was in a cell next door to you or quite far away from you?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I could not hear properly. They only thing that I would
hear would be this bunch of keys when they opened doors. I could not see
the other cells when we were being put here. I only saw my cell, but I
could hear the sound of the bunch of keys when they were opening. That is
when I realised that there might be cells that they are opening.

MS SOOKA: Do you know what the name of the police station was where you
were being kept? Was this is in Krugersdorp or in Roodepoort?

MRS SEKHOACHA: It is in Krugersdorp because Paul Kruger's statue is in
Krugersdorp. That is where we were arrested, but I cannot exactly point
out where the buildings were, but it is in Krugersdorp Police Station.

MS SOOKA: Do you know the names, at any time when you were taken, did you
hear the names of the policemen who had taken you?

MRS SEKHOACHA: There was no way you could ask the name of the policemen
because of their manner. You could not ask anything. We were not there to
lay a charge, but we were not asked anything about our names and any
detail.

MS SOOKA: Mama, after this incident, once you had got

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	15	A SEKHOACHA

home, you said that the investigations to find Maria were not successful.
Can you tell us some of the things that were done by Maria's family?

MRS SEKHOACHA: My parents and her parents tried their best, but in vane.

MS SOOKA: Did they go back to that police station?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I do not know really, because that was parental matters.
They were doing everything on their own. I just told them the whole story
and they did the follow-up. MS SOOKA: Mama, after this incident did you
go to a doctor? Was any medical examination done on you?

MRS SEKHOACHA: There was a clinic. We were only going to the clinic and
not to doctors. I went to Perdekraal when my health situation
deteriorated, but I was only getting treatment from the clinic and even
my parents tried to give me herbs, because that is what we were relying
on in those days. We were not aware of X-rays and all those facilities at
that time. Our parents did their best.

MS SOOKA: Mama, a few more questions. In any of the years after this
incident, have you still kept contact with Maria's family at all?

MRS SEKHOACHA: Maria's family, when this happened, they moved away from
our yard. They went away, they removed their shack because they said that
whenever they see Maria, I remind them of Maria whenever they see me.

MS SOOKA: Mama, just on the, you mention that you had been dismissed when
you were involved in discussing problems with management. Where were you
employed as a nurse?

MRS SEKHOACHA: It was Mohlakeng Physciatry Hospital.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. Mama, and one more question. Your son, you say, in
your evidence you talk about your son being KRUGERSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	16	A SEKHOACHA

almost blinded and also about the fact that he is a cripple. Can you just
tell us a little more about what the details are?

MRS SEKHOACHA: My health situation, it is quite unpleasant because in my
life, at the moment, I am not healthy because when I look back to my
youth days I realise that because of being imprisoned all that time,
because I was trying to address people's grievances and, as I have said,
for 20 years I never got a cent when I tried to struggle for freedom.
Thereafter my son, also, was as unfortunate like me. Until today I do not
know whether my son will be as unfortunate like me or will I also die
like my father before I can do anything for him.

MS SOOKA: Sorry, Mama, I think that, perhaps, I did not ask the question
properly. What I am trying to find out is exactly what is wrong with your
son? You see in your story you talked about the fact that he needed
spectacles and you also talked about him being a cripple. Now can you
tell us exactly what is wrong with him?

MRS SEKHOACHA: He is not physically fit because he cannot just do
ordinary housework. Since he was beaten by these white men. He use to
love doing gardening, but he cannot even use a spade to dig in the
garden. He is semi-blinded. He has got too many mistakes at school. He
has got problems.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Mama, no more questions.

CHAIRPERSON: Dr Randera.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Sekhoacha, I just want to ask you, again, about your son.
At the time that he was arrested, at the football field, you said, what
was the reason, not arrested, they were taken by these four policemen.
What was the

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	17	A SEKHOACHA

reason, I mean were they involved in any political activity, was he a
member of any political structure in Mohlakeng?

MRS SEKHOACHA: No, this child was taken by white men in the soccer field
and took them to Botha's farm. When they got there they tied them up next
to the dam and attempted to kill them. Therefore the policemen to know
that these children are there, they were informed by some men in the
neighbourhood. That is how the statement goes.

DR RANDERA: And how did you find him? You said he was taken to Botha's
farm. Did he walk home after that?

MRS SEKHOACHA: No, he was brought by the police. After this man phoned in
the neighbourhood, the child who saw the direction taken, in which these
children were taken by these white men and kicking them with his horses.
A police van followed them and found these children there being kept by
these white men. They put them in the van and brought them home. They
were showing these policemen their homes and my son directed them to my
house as well.

DR RANDERA: So these white men who took your son and his friends to
Botha's farm were not policemen?

MRS SEKHOACHA: They were not tortured by policemen. It was white farmers.

DR RANDERA: Okay, thank you. Did you have to take him to hospital when he
came home?

MRS SEKHOACHA: I took him to Dr Morula because I did not have money. The
neighbours suggested that I must take him to Dr Morula because he was
helpless, he could not even walk properly.

DR RANDERA: How old is he now?

MRS SEKHOACHA: 14 Years old at the moment.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much, I have no further

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	18	A SEKHOACHA

questions.

CHAIRPERSON: You have told us very painful things. That on your way back
from home to be assaulted because of a dumb statue and people did not
even respect your school uniform and threw you in the cells. It shows
about the past, the painful past that we come from and we know that the
disappearance of Maria has haunted you, until today you do not where
Maria is. We are so sorry for you that, unfortunately, your son was also
affected as well. Is there any request that you have from the Truth
Commission or anything that we can follow-up or any recommendations that
we can put forward.

MRS SEKHOACHA: The one thing that would make me happy was to know about
Maria's whereabouts. Is she dead or what has happened to her, and if she
is dead, they must show us where they buried her because there is nothing
painful like somebody disappearing. I use to treat her like my sister. We
were innocent. If she was buried by her parents and me knowing that where
is she buried, I would not be hurt anymore because sometimes I dream of
Maria. Secondly, these policemen are no longer around. I am a mother
today who cannot do washing for her children like any mother does. I need
help because I cannot do anything for my children because I must pay for
somebodies services to do this washing. As I have said I cannot eat
apples and peanuts like ordinary mothers. I wish that the Truth
Commission could see what they could do with us. My husband is not
working, I am the breadwinner as I have already mentioned.

CHAIRPERSON: We will try to forward our recommendations to the Reparation
and Rehabilitation Committee. It is not something that will happen
rapidly because all this will

KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	19	A SEKHOACHA

still be discussed in Parliament, but there is an urgent interim relief
that we are trying. We will try and forward your request to them. We
thank you for coming here today and we trust that God will help heal all
these wounds after so many years. We thank you.

	Whilst we are waiting for our next witness we would like to ...

















































KRUGERSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

