	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	26.09.1996		NAME: SAM JENNY SENATLE

CASE: 01518 	 KLERKSDORP

DAY 4

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Senatle, good morning.

MR SENATLE: Thank you, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you feeling a little easier? I know you were feeling a
little anxious earlier on.

MR SENATLE: I think so.

CHAIRPERSON: Good. Can you introduce the lady who is with you this
morning?

MR SENATLE: That's my sister.

CHAIRPERSON: I welcome your sister too. Mr Senatle, you are from
Jouberton.

MR SENATLE: Yes, that's true.

CHAIRPERSON: Which is just up Klerksdorp.

MR SENATLE: That's true.

CHAIRPERSON: You have also come to talk to us about two incidences, or in
fact three incidences, all relating to yourself. Prof Piet Meiring who is
sitting over there, he is going to be helping you in telling your story.
But before I hand over to him would you please stand to take the oath.

SAM JENNY SENATLE; (Duly sworn, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mr Senatle. Prof Meiring?

PROF MEIRING: Mr Senatle, good morning.

MR SENATLE: Good morning, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: Before we start with your story, I would love KLERKSDORP
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	S M SENATLE

to know a little about Mr Senatle himself. In your statement you say that
you are 29 years of age. Is that correct?

MR SENATLE: That's true, sir.

PROF MEIRING: Are you working?

MR SENATLE: I am not working, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: Where did you go to school?

MR SENATLE: I did but I didn't arrive where I wanted to be.

PROF MEIRING: Where did you arrive at school?

MR SENATLE: Std 9, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: And you would wish to go further with your studies?

MR SENATLE: I tried very hard but because of the weaknesses I was not
able to go further.

PROF MEIRING: Are you married?

MR SENATLE: I am not married, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: Do you have children?

MR SENATLE: I have one child.

PROF MEIRING: A boy or a girl?

MR SENATLE: That's a girl, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: And how old is the girl?

MR SENATLE: Twelve years, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you. Many, or many of the things that you are going
to relate to us this morning, has everything to do with the rent boycott
of September 1985. Before you tell your story, please put us in the
picture, what happened with the rent boycott? Was it a very large
boycott, did many people take part in the boycott? Please tell us about
the boycott of September 1985.

MR SENATLE: In 1985 the Jouberton youth, we tried to assemble ourselves
to build JOYCO which is Jouberton Youth

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	S M SENATLE

Congress. Which is objective, was to fight against the government of the
day.

	In 1985, that is when that we had strength to plan the boycotts, which
will shake the government of the day. The consumer boycotts were the
instruments which we used to shake the government. The citizens of
Jouberton were supporting us. Even if the arrests happened before we
achieved our objective. It was in 1985 when we were still planning to
bring the consumer boycott into operation, as we know that even before
Judas Iscariot was there. I was arrested on the 12th of September, and
therefore our plans to continue with the boycotts ran by consumer
boycotts, we hadn't started yet at that time. But the citizens of the
area were supporting us at that time.

PROF MEIRING: Were you very active politics?

MR SENATLE: Yes, I was taking part in politics. Very strongly. I was a
member of the JOYCO, which is Jouberton Youth Congress it was an
affiliate to the UDF.

PROF MEIRING: Did you figure as an activist in Jouberton at that time?

MR SENATLE: Yes, I was well-known, because of my role I played, because I
was a dancer before I took part in politics.

PROF MEIRING: A dancer?

MR SENATLE: Yes.

PROF MEIRING: That's interesting. But Mr Senatle, please tell us now what
happened on that fatal day of the 12th of September.

MR SENATLE: On the 12th of September 1985, immediately after we had a
meeting together with those who started JOYCO, the police came to my
house, at about between three

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	S M SENATLE

and four in the morning. I heard police knocking at the door. I was
sleeping with my uncle in one room, in an outside room. I realised that I
should wake up and go and look what is happening. When I looked through
the window, I saw policemen knocking very hard. One of the comrades whom
we were with, who is Victor Seretse, whom I realised that he was badly
injured. That has made me to be aware that the police are looking for me.

	Then I went to the back of the bedroom. I spoke to my uncle and said he
must tell them that I am not around. Then I went inside the wardrobe,
then I covered myself with clothes. They opened the door themselves. How
they opened it I don't know. They entered in the room in which we were
sleeping. Then they asked my uncle where I am. Then he said Jenny is not
around, he is not sleeping here. Then there was one policeman who was
saying do you know me? He was asking my uncle. Then my uncle said I don't
know you. Then he said I am the Fairy. Then they started to assault him
until he admitted I am in the wardrobe. Then he stretched his hand inside
the wardrobe. At the time I had long hair, because I was going to the
dance competitition. He stretched his hand and then he pulled off my
hair. 	Thereafter there was a torch which was shone into my eyes, then
they hit me with the fists. I started bleeding at that time inside the
wardrobe. Then he pulled me outside the wardrobe.

	My father tried to ask what is happening. They didn't even care to
answer. Then they said I should go with them. My father gave me clothes.
I was putting on my clothes while I was working. Peter Seretse was put
into another van. I was put in a blue van. They went with me to the cells
of the

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	S M SENATLE

municipal police which were in Jouberton.

	When we arrived there they were beating me with fists, they were kicking
me. When I was standing - I found other comrades who were already beaten
at that time. They were asking me that the leaders who were prepared to
lead the consumer boycotts, who are they. Then I said to them that there
is no leader, all of us are leaders at the school, and all of us, we are
prepared to start with this boycott. Then they were beating me again and
kicking me. Then one policeman called De Kock - he was speaking with me
in Afrikaans, he was looking at literature. I pretended I don't hear
anything. Then April came in and said what is the problem. Then he said
this man cannot speak Afrikaans, but today he is going to speak Afrikaans.

	Then we went out to the car. Then he brought a long gun. Then he pulled
that gun and said to me you are going to speak Afrikaans today. Then when
he pointed the gun at me I said boss, I will now talk. Then he said to
April, do this thing. Then April and Steve Dekopi who was calling himself
I beat the dog, they were kicking me and assaulting me. Thereafter my
eyes were starting now to lose sight. I fell down as if I have epilepsy.
When I made myself to fall down, made it worse. They were jumping and
then they were hitting on my head. As on the photos that I will show you.
Then I stood up. Then my mouth broke. Then they said do you still not
want to tell the truth. There was a bicycle which was there. It was
inside the cell. They picked up the bicycle and hit me with that bicycle.
Then the handle hit me on the head, I had to have stitches.

	Thereafter they said they are going to look for others. I didn't know
who the others were. Because I was bleeding

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	S M SENATLE

from the mouth and the nose - amongst our comrades there was one who
secreted. In that cell there was a toilet, there was a bucket. They took
me by my hair and they took my head and inside the toilet and inside that
bucket. Then then threw their legs they were hitting me on the head. On
my hospital file - my voice is not this way. It is written on the file
which shows that I was able to see my file in 1986, it is here. It is
written that my throat has been injured. They trapped by their feet and
flushed the toilet. Then they took me out of the toilet. I was filled
with secrete and they left me.

	After some five minutes one of the policemen who was working at the
municipal offices, and that name is Kepida Sakopela. It was in the
morning. He went to buy us bread and milk and then he said we should eat.
I was not able to eat because my mouth was injured. The teacher which I
was wearing, was left only with a collar. My back as if it has been bent
with irons. Those things happened in 1985, but if you look at my back it
seems it is rotten. After a long time they went outside. Then Mr Sakopela
said we had better go out.

	Then I was admitted to hospital. Then the other comrades were just
washed and treated and left.

	On the 19th, in October, the police came again. I was saying because
they thought maybe they will be surprised by the case, but they took me
to Stilfontein police station. We knew it as Moerfontein. We arrived
there together with April and Dotty was there.

	They showed me a cell which was full of blood. They said to me your
blood is going to remain here. They threatened me and then they left me
inside.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	S M SENATLE

	The following day they took me out. There was a place, we didn't know
there is a police station in Renoville. I was thrown inside that room. I
was thrown inside that room. Whilst I was still sleeping in the morning
at about ten o'clock, there were boers who were there wearing uniforms.
The Fear Lulu Tridi Zebeda entered. Then he said you, comrade, you think
you are going to make love alone. Then I want to show you. He was having
a big plank. He hit me on the waist with it, then I was able to get hold
of it. Then he said I should open my legs. I did that because I thought
he is searching me. Then he came nearer me and then he kicked me on my
private parts. I fell down, I was crying. I think I sleeping there about
two hours. Then he left me while I was still sleeping, and then he went
out.

	During the day they said to me I should leave. Then I didn't even fill
in any forms there, I thought they were going to kill me. From Unionville
(?) to the location, it wasn't too far. Then I went there with my feet.

	On the 25th in November, we were just about to write exams. They just
arrived and picked us up again with other comrades. They took us to
Klerksdorp police station. They said we are going to write exams in that
place, in the police station. Fortunately the students like fighting that
they don't agree with what they are saying.

	The parents committee was formed. Bisho Dwand was there and Letala was
there, and other people - I don't remember, I think my super was there.
They tried to intervene that we should be released that we should go and
write exams outside. It was there - before they released us, a
(indistinct) said to me I should leave this case and together
(indistinct). They took me to the other room

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	S M SENATLE

which was full of corpses. Then he said he is in favour of me and he
doesn't want to do bad things. So he made me to touch one corpse which
was - after that we were released to go to school.

	In January in 1986, I think it was the second week of that January. I
don't remember the actual date. They came, April and company came again.
I was sleeping in the forest. I was not able to sleep at home. I didn't
sleep at home that day and I was sleeping next-door. I was able to hear
them when they knocked during the night. When we wake up we could see
that they have come again. My uncle at that time was wearing a blue
underwear. He was taken like that and put in a van. I was able to hear
that they were hitting my father and my brothers and sisters. What I am
able to say is that my father had a blind eye, but what they were using
to hit him and he (indistinct) now. They were hitting him to the extent
that he has an artificial eye. They were hitting him and they were saying
my uncle should go and identify other uncles of mine, maybe they will get
me there. They went to 68 where my other uncle was staying. They arrived
there and opened and the girls were sitting there. They were hitting one
cousin of mine who is now an epileptic. He is 26 years old. He is getting
a subsistence allowance since he was beaten by the police.

	Three days thereafter I said to myself I should go and sleep at home,
because if they can get me outside the house they are goingto kill me.
They found me. Then they took me to Klerksdorp police station. They took
me to the charge office. I was instructed to take off my clothes in front
of two White girls who were working there. I was naked. Before those
girls.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	S M SENATLE

	There was one boer called Tuti, he was a policeman. They brought dogs.
Then they said I am going to stand there the whole day. I thought they
were joking. I had no underwear. I stood there before those girls. Those
dogs were barking at me. When I closed the door to try to sleep, the dogs
were barking. When my private parts were shaking a little bit these dogs
would bark. Then I said perhaps I could have had no private parts by now.
I was standing there the whole day until the following day.

	They didn't take any statement from me. Then they said to me I must go.
Then I didn't have any shoes, I was barefoot. I went to my father at
work. Then when I arrived there I asked him to take me home, because my
legs were swollen.

	Again, on the 7th of February, they were supposed to have a funeral of a
comrade who was shot. Then they phoned Jean Pretorius, De Kock and others
came to fetch me. Then they took me to the police station. From there we
were taken to Stilfontein. We were detained again. On the 10th we were
supposed to appear in court. I was together with Abe Mahono. We went to
court. It was remanded. We were taken back to Klerksdorp prison. We
stayed there. On the 12th we appeared in court.

	People were burning halls at that time. On the 12th we appeared in
court. We were charged with public violence. I don't know which one it
was. Because they could have charged me with sleeping violence because
they found me asleep. We were left in court and then we were told we
should go home.

	On the 12th of May I was not sleeping at home at that time, I was
sleeping at my sister's house, together with my

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	S M SENATLE

friend, called Benji Oliphant. On the 10th, from my sister's house we
were planning to leave. When we arrived at the post office, the old one,
there were boys who were standing there, saying to me the police were
looking for me. It was on the 9th. When we were waiting, the police van
was following us. I just heard shots and I just thought they were
shooting at Joe's Garage. The marks are there even still now. We opened
the door and then we went in there. Then we went through the back door.
We left together with Benji. He took his own way, I took my own way.

	Then I ran home. I was wearing dance shoes. Then I ran home. At home I
decided to put on tackies so that I could leave. It was about ten o'clock
in the morning. I put on the tackies. My younger brother was sleeping on
the sofa. Then I asked him to come and lock the door and then I went to
the opposite house.

	After ten minutes (indistinct), Matebe, they were busy breaking the
dining room door. Then the soldiers were there and the police cars were
there and the house was surrounded. They broke in, they were having guns.
I was then looking through the window, from the opposite house.

PROF MEIRING: Mr Senatle, we have to move along rather quickly. Was that
when you eventually fled and went to the cemetery and stayed in the
cemetery?

MR SENATLE: That's true, Sir.

PROF MEIRING: And then again, you were arrested and you together with
Benji Oliphant and you were taken to Jouberton police station.

MR SENATLE: No, Sir. After I ran with Benji, the followin gday I went to
my sister's house. Then we disguised ourselves. Then my sister gave us
evening dresses with Afro

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	S M SENATLE

wigs. Then we went to Ellis Hadji, then he took us to Porch we decided to
go to Johannesburg. That is where I separated from Benji. After that,
that was the last time I saw Benji.

	On the 11th of June, the week after I ran away, I went back home again.
On the 11th of June they came to pick me up, April and company. They
arrested me under the Internal Scurity Act. On the 12th, the state of
emergency was declared. Then Bishop Mdande was there. The journalist
Hoffmann was there, Mosupa was there. We were taken to Khuma police
station. Where we were forced, together with Pakadi, he was a councillor
by then, we were forced to sing revolutionary songs. We were hit, they
were hitting us at that time. After two days we were taken to Klerksdorp
prison.

PROF MEIRING: According to your witness, after you were taken to prison
in September 1986, you were taken to an isolation cell.

MR SENATLE: After interrogation by April, there was a policeman called
Bennett. I was taken by adjudant Kruger from the cell, but that was an
adjudant. They took me to an isolation cell. Journalist Hoffmann was
there and Pagad was there. We were interrogated in single cells, but they
were open, I was able to hear them and Bennett was asking me where Benji
is. Then I said we separated in Johannesburg. Then I was adamant at that
time. Then Bennett started hitting me. Since he was unable to get the
truth, he called April to say this person is insulting your mother. Then
April, he didn't ask, then when I refused that and say I didn't insult
his mother, then Bennett assaulted me by saying I am telling a lie. Then
April pulled out a gun. Then he said this dog, we should kill him before
we get

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	12	S M SENATLE

Benji. He didn't even want to throw his case. Then April tried it.

PROF MEIRING: Everything happened in September 1986.

MR SENATLE: 1986.

PROF MEIRING: And then according to your testimony, you stayed in the
isolation cell in prison for a whole year, for nearly a year. It was only
in June 1987 that you were released. Is that correct?

MR SENATLE: I didn't stay the whole period in prison. It was only that
time that I was assaulted that I was returned to the cell, but I was
taken to other comrades. I was assaulted April handcuffed me. Then they
put me in the corner of the wall. Uys and Kruger were there at that time.
Together with Bennett they were hitting my head against the wall. I was
even worse as compared to the photos I am going to produce. I was not
able to see. They were pouring water over me. Then I collapsed on the
steps in prison. Then that is that when I was taken to my isolation cell.
That is where I stayed. At that time, Judge Goldstone Stone came to the
prisoners. I believe he came at the time while I still had scars on my
face. I stayed there and then in December I heard that Benji Oliphant has
been killed. I heard that from April Tswaide. Because he said he he is
going to start with me and then after that he is going to kill Benji.

	In 1987 we were released together with other comrades. We were bribed
that we should leave all those political activities and we were taken out
on Sunday. The police said that we could go home.

PROF MEIRING: I see it is a long story you had to tell us and you had a
very, very painful experience. But thank you for sharing that with us.
May I ask only one or two

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	13	S M SENATLE

questions and then I will hand you over to my colleagues who will no
doubt would like to ask you a question or two themselves. The real
question I would like ask of you is, after your release, you say that you
suffered a lot and that you were not able to work. Is that correct?

MR SENATLE: Yes, that's true.

PROF MEIRING: Do you have a disability grant, do you receive money montly
to live on?

MR SENATLE: Nothing, Sir.

END OF TAPE - SIDE A

MR SENATLE: ... through dance competitions, even if they don't bring
much, because at home we are about six and there is nobody working.

PROF MEIRING: The dance competitions, does that bring in money?

MR SENATLE: There is a problem that people are not used to dance
competitions and people are not attending.

PROF MEIRING: Your daughter is twelve years of age. Who cares for her?

MR SENATLE: Her mother is the one who takes care of her.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. I think I am finished with all my
questions. I would like to hand you back to the Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Tom Manthata?

MR MANTHATA: Sam, I see here that even when you were arrested, there was
one comrade who died and then was buried. I wanted to find out whether
through your boycotts, was there any person who died? For instance,
people who were working within the councils and the policemen, to show
that your boycott was the boycott of killing?

MR SENATLE: In Jouberton no policeman was attacked.

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	14	S M SENATLE

Except in 1987 when the police were not understanding, they were killing
then and the people were fighting back. But I am not sure whether there
was a policeman who was attacked. MR MANTHATA: At that time during
1985/1986, was there no policeman who was attacked or killed?

MR SENATLE: The intention was not to kill.

MR MANTHATA: There was a parents committee at that time, what was the
work of the parents committee to help you with?

MR SENATLE: It was formed during that time when we were just about to
write our exams and when the police wanted us to write exams in the
police station, then they formed the parents committee to intervene in
that crisis.

MR MANTHATA: But during your arrest, and even in your assaults in your
torture, besides the examination thing, they were not helping or trying
to give you support, which you needed?

MR SENATLE: The parents committee, after it was formed, it was there
after Bishop Mdande, they were also arrested at that time. It was taken
as if they were influencing us. So they were giving us direction and they
were showing us our mistakes if they were there.

MR MANTHATA: In other words they were giving you moral support.

MR SENATLE: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: During that time, in the UDF leadership who were members?

MR SENATLE: At the (indistinct) at that time, there was no leader as
such, during 1985.

MR MANTHATA: Then how were you able to work with UDF in Johannesburg when
you were able to run away as well?

MR SENATLE: I didn't run away to Johannesburg. The person

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	15	S M SENATLE

who was able to run to Johannesburg was Benji Oliphant. But people like
Terror was appearing at times.

MR MANTHATA: I would ask that during that time when you were a leader,
that now how do you see yourself, are you a leader or not?

MR SENATLE: For now I am a volunteer worker in the Arts and Culture
Department in RDP in Klerksdorp, on a voluntary basis.

MR MANTHATA: The members of the parents committee, I heard you speaking
or Rev Masupa. How did you work with them, now in the committee of
Jouberton?

MR SENATLE: I believe they are still regarded as our leaders, and where
necessary, to give support they give that support. Even though they are
not directly involved in the leadership, but they are still given that
respect because we know that they have worked in the struggle.

MR MANTHATA: Now it seems now the situation now between you and them and
the police, is there any peace?

MR SENATLE: I have peace together with many policemen, but I have no
peace with those who have made me a cripple.

MR MANTHATA: Are they still in Stilfontein?

MR SENATLE: April is still working full-time.

MR MANTHATA: Being that way, how do you work with them when you meet
them? Do you have hope that they would bring peace in the area?

MR SENATLE: I hope that, it is painful, it is still painful to me. I am a
friend of man policemen. I remain being their friend but I would not be a
friend to De Kock, Viljoen, (indistinct), April and others. I will never
be their friend.

MR MANTHATA: During the time when these things were

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	16	S M SENATLE

happening, did you see a doctor, were you examined by a doctor?

MR SENATLE: Yes, Sir.

MR MANTHATA: Was there a lawyer for human rights who was helping in
Jouberton?

MR SENATLE: Ja, Bell was there at that time. But in my case there was a
problem, because when I was in hospital my father was not informed. So he
even went to another lawyer somewhere.

MR MANTHATA: Many people whom you were working with, who were tortured,
the way you were tortured, where are they now?

MR SENATLE: There was a problem that the police at that time, when they
were arresting whoever was arrested, so many disappeared. Some ran away
and we had no boys in the townships. So the parents were not able to get
the information.

MR MANTHATA: People like Benji who were leaders, how did people think of
him?

MR SENATLE: Benji is a leader and he was our leader and even among the
people, that sentiment still remains.

MR MANTHATA: We are trying to look whether the community, the Jouberton
community, are they still able to try to build leaders and do things
which will make, will create progress in the community? We do know that
things like this will not happen until people like you are not in danger,
as you were. I thank you.

DR RANDERA: Two points, Mr Senatle. You said you had the photographs that
you wanted to show to us. Perhaps you can pass that to us, okay? My
second question is related to all these times that you were tortured. Did
you ever lay any

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	17	S M SENATLE

charges against the police at that time?

MR SENATLE: In 1985 I did make a charge against the police, which I do
not know where it ended.

DR RANDERA: Was that the only time?

MR SENATLE: That was the only time, Sir.

DR RANDERA: And the time that you spent in prison, you spent almost a
year in prison. Was that just under the state of emergency or was there a
court case at which you were charged and then sentenced?

MR SENATLE: It was the state of emergency. Then at times I was just
arrested, released and just like that.

DR RANDERA: Thank you, Mr Senatle.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Senatle, what are the other documents that you have got?

MR SENATLE: They are from the hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: The hospital records, the hospital report?

MR SENATLE: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Would you hand that in to us, please?

MR SENATLE: Yes, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Senatle, it just remains for me to thank you for coming,
and thank you for sharing your experiences with us. It is important to be
reminded of the price that was paid for what has been achieved and what
is starting to be enjoyed by people today. Often it is painful to recount
experiences of this nature, but it is important because it is also easy
to forget. We want to thank you for just having done that. Also reminding
us of the sacrifice of young people in the process that led up to the
democracy that we have today. What strikes one when one listens to
testimony all over the country, is that there was a generation of youth
that were simply thrown into adulthood

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	18	S M SENATLE

at a time when other young people had dreams and ideals and were pursuing
those dreams and ideals and living a normal life. A lot of young people
had to forego on that, and were thrown into the conflict that we have
experienced. We want to thank you for taking us back and reminding us of
that as well.

	Your testimony again refers to some names amongst the police that have
been coming up repeatedly in this sitting here in Klerksdorp, who,
according, to submissions made, played a leading role in suppression, in
adopting unlawful means, of dealing with people and young people and we
have noted that. A previous Chairperson a day or two ago, has extended an
invitation to those people to own up and to make use of the channels
which are created by this Commission. I simply want to repeat that.

	But we thank you for coming. We have noted everything that you have
said, and we wish you well.

MR SENATLE: I just wanted to make a remark. I heard what Mr Chairperson
said. It has been asked that the perpetrators should make use of this
opportunity to apply. I also wish - as long as they are not brought to
book, because of the sufferings that I have undergone. Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Mr Senatle.



	--------------













KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



