
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		02.09.96 NELSPRUIT

CASE NUMBER:	940 NAME: NEVILLE SHABANGU

NEVILLE SHABANGU (s.s.)

MRS SOOKA: Neville, before you begin your story, will you give us a
little bit about yourself please.

MR SHABANGU: About my life history or ...

MRS SOOKA: A little bit about your life history, what you are doing now
and what you did at the time in 1986.

MR SHABANGU: In 1983 and 1984 I started to work in the organisation. In
1983 we started an organisation and we named it Lowveld Youth Movement.
Therefore in 1985 we started a UDF affiliated to that organisation too.
The UDF was the umbrella body. We were busy, it is where I started being
affected by what happened.

MRS SOOKA: Carry on.

MR SHABANGU: Can I ask - can I start with my story or what?

MRS SOOKA: Yes, you can. You can start with your story.

MR SHABANGU: From 1986 we were harassed by police. They used to visit us
at home. They came and questioned us which organisation or which
(indistinct) especially the UDF, we are causing people to burn houses in
the township. But it wasn't like that. Every time the police used to
visit us at home. If they could not find me they could find my brothers
and they were also harassed by the police. In March 1986 there were
children who were in the prison in our location. They were taken to
Mbeweni magistrate court. As children we were supporting each other
during those times. The others

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	2	SHABANGU

went to support those who were in prison. On their arrival to Mboweni
magistrate court is where the child of my sister was shot. From there the
police were the enemies. We could not even see each other. They used to
visit us. They used to wake us at night searching the houses. They took
our books, video cassettes, they could take everything which they wanted
where they could believe they can get information from. We buried our
sister's child in March 1986. After the funeral, I am sure it was about a
month from the funeral, is it where then I become also wounded, when our
house was burnt. After the burning of the house I went to the hospital in
Rob Ferreira. The people in the hospital could not meet me, they said I
must go to Mboweni because this was not a hospital for the blacks.
Mboweni hospital was the hospital for the blacks. Fortunately my sister
was there working. He fought with the doctors until I was admitted. I was
then I had 45 per cent burns. I stayed in the hospital. The following day
after my admission a certain John Welthouse arrived. He was the one who
used to visit us at home and Greyling and Visser. They came to me in the
hospital to question who burnt me. Because I had no enemy beside the
police I told them that the police did burn me. They could not want to
agree to that. They told me that I am mad. I stayed in the hospital for
three and a half month. I wasn't well but the people in the hospital told
me that I have to go out because there are many patients there. I was
therefore discharged. I went home, I only stayed at home for one day. The
following day there was a state of emergency and I was detained. I was
taken to prison and I was tortured and I was wounded by that time I was
still suffering the pain. Then they were

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	3	SHABANGU

torturing us in the police station. They used to give us one meal per
day. We could not get enough food. We used to get food only once per day.
They therefore transferred us from the police station to the prison. We
went to the prison. We spent about three months in prison. There in the
police station I was tortured. My hands were tied from the back, they
were blindfolding me on my eyes and they beat me. I could not even
protect myself. There were many people surrounding me, I can't even see
them. I was tortured and they beat me and I was building (?). They
fetched for me the doctor to treat me in the cell, they could not agree
that someone can come in the cell there. Therefore they transferred us to
the prison where we stayed for three months. It is there where Judge
Goldstone visited us. He was the first person to visit us. There was more
visitors even the parents, friends, lawyers were not allowed to visit us
and to see us. We therefore saw Mr Goldstone. It is where we talked to
him and our complaint and laid charges, it was on Friday. On Monday I was
released. I went out and I went home.

MRS SOOKA: Before I hand you over to the other Commissioners, I would
just like to ask you a few questions please. Could you tell me who you
think set your house alight please.

MR SHABANGU: I think the police because it wasn't for the first time that
they burn houses. The people whom we were working with in the struggle,
they burnt their houses too. MRS SOOKA: In your statement you mentioned
that you think the police hired a special group of people. Do you want to
tell us about that please.

MR SHABANGU: Yes, there were police and a group working

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	4	SHABANGU

together with the police. They called them Gabasa group. Those people
were the group that were burning children, shooting them. They were
attacking people. Where you would think that the police were not involved
while they were involved. They were working hand in hand with the police
even during our torture and interrogation in the prison they were around
the prison helping the police. They couldn't be walking around and yet
they were not in collaboration with the police.

MRS SOOKA: You also mentioned in your story that you had buried your
sister's son. Why was he shot? Was he also a member of the UDF?

MR SHABANGU: No, he was not a member. He was too young. He was about 16
years old, he was not a member yet of the UDF. He was just a small boy,
he was just a follower to go and listen at the hearings at the magistrate
court.

MRS SOOKA: What were these hearings about?

MR SHABANGU: It was actually about some young people who actually burnt
the cars. They burnt the cars and they were then arrested. That is the
reason why they were taken to - they had to appear before the Court. So
the friends went actually as a way of supporting them. They were charged
for public violence.

MRS SOOKA: At the time when you were detained you mentioned that a state
of emergency was declared and then you and other members of the UDF were
detained. Could you tell us how many of you were detained please.

MR SHABANGU: There were many members because myself, I was arrested
together with my brother and another friend of ours was also arrested
together with his brother. I remember those who were detained at that
time we were around about

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	5	SHABANGU

eight. And some were from other places. All in all these people while we
were in prison we were about 50. Some were left behind at the police
station. I don't know how many were there.

MRS SOOKA: The people who tortured you at the police station, do you have
their names for us?

MR SHABANGU: I have got the name of John Walters. He was actually the
leading person. He is the person who took me around to the fifth floor
and he blindfolded me and some of his colleagues came after I was
blindfolded then I could not see them.

MRS SOOKA: When Judge Goldstone came to see you at the prison, can you
tell us if he took a statement from

you?

MR SHABANGU: Judge Goldstone he was just visiting the people who were
detained then. And then he said to us we should go and lay charges at the
police station after our release.

MRS SOOKA: Did you follow his advice and lay charges against the police?

MR SHABANGU: I did not go to lay charges because the people who tortured
me I cannot go to the very same people who tortured me to go and open a
case. I think there is nothing that can happen.

MRS SOOKA: Since that time did anybody - did they ever open any case
about the burning of your house?

MR SHABANGU: The case was reported at the police station at Kanyamazane
that our house was burnt. It was just that and it ended there. The case
was opened but nothing happened.

MRS SOOKA: So you never received any kind of compensation for the burning
of your house.

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	6	SHABANGU

MR SHABANGU: Yes, I did not receive anything.

MRS SOOKA: Thank you.

MRS MKHIZE: Mr Shabangu I will ask you some questions, I will go back a
little bit in order to get more clarity to what you have been saying. You
said to us during 1983 to 1986 you started about the struggle. Can you
tell us briefly what were your objectives, what were you busy doing when
you were struggling or you were waging a struggle.

MR SHABANGU: During that time there is nothing that you could do which
was accepted as being right. Then we said if we could form an
organisation that if we could form an organisation known as Lowveld Youth
Movement I could say it was just - how can I put it, it was just an
organisation for social events like playing games and to perform plays in
order to gather the youth that they should not just go to other places.
It was just to bring them together in order to perform certain plays with
an aim actually to promote the objective of the movement. Trying to teach
people politics so that they must be politically aware to know exactly
what was taking place then.

MRS MKHIZE: You are saying in your organisation you thought that it would
be wise to have sport and teach people and conscientise people about
politics. Now during that time didn't you think perhaps that you will
have some conflict with the police as you were teaching the young people?

MR SHABANGU: Yes. When you start something of this nature you know very
well that you tease the police. We did realise the fact that actually
this thing will somehow end at the police but we have already started, we
could not reverse it.

MRS MKHIZE: The other thing which you said, you said the

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	7	SHABANGU

police said that you are the people actually who were sort of making
people to burn houses. Now can you tell us exactly burning of houses and
the killing of people, how does these two things go together.

MR SHABANGU: We built a park. This park that is where the young people
actually was using it as sort of a gathering place. This park actually
was not meant, it was actually meant that these people should use the
park but not for meetings. Now the young people actually thought this is
a correct spot where they can sort of meet. Burning of houses and cars
had nothing to do with us, it was done by other people who were just not
part of our organisation.

MRS MKHIZE: Just explain to us about your organisation and that park.
Because you realise that you could also make use of the very same venue
to have your meetings there. Did you take any decisions which could sort
of give direction to the young people in order to go around and do
whatever what you have decided on?

MR SHABANGU: No, the youth were just meeting on their own. We were not
mixing with them. We were not mixing with them.

MRS MKHIZE: There is another thing that you said to us, which we would
like to get clarity on about your statement and you have already
indicated that on your statement, that you were tortured. You said they
blindfolded you and they beat you and they tied your hands at the back.
Can you tell us some of the other things that actually happened to you
besides those which you have mentioned, if you can still remember. And
you said to us that they were giving you one meal a day. Can you tell us
perhaps anything that you can still remember that took place then which
could sort of attach to what you have said that you were tortured.

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	8	SHABANGU

MR SHABANGU: I can say that is one time where we were beaten all of us in
a cell and actually it was done by many police. They beat us, besides
that I was being beaten alone. We were beaten together with our friends
in a cell. The other thing, some police, those who were working at night
were actually whites. When we were asleep they were bringing their
children and saying here are the terrorists. At the police station where
I was there is a place where you could walk and you could see through a
glass and they could see through that glass. They were bringing their
kids to parade there and show them that here are the terrorists. That is
all I can say.

MRS MKHIZE: Maybe Mr Shabangu, you know this is our first sitting here.
The reason why we are asking a lot of questions we want to go out from
here having a full explanation. You need to explain and you must explain
to us that you were beaten together with your friends. If you can tell us
you can tell us how many were you, who came in, who actually tortured
you. Can you tell us briefly on that?

MR SHABANGU: We were five in our cell. Walters came in and some other
policemen from the security branch but some were just police. They came
in, they beat us, they beat all five of us and each one had to select his
own partner and he was just beating him. We were having done nothing in
fact. And they said to us we are not co-operating. The other thing they
said to us we will not come alive. It is either that we die or we escape
the country. Those were actually threatening words to us. If you say that
you don't co-operate do you know perhaps there were certain things we
should - they were demanding from you which you could not give them and
yes they asked me where did I train and they

NELSPRUIT HEARING	TRC/MPUMALANGA



	9	SHABANGU

asked my MK number. I did not know about those things. They asked me when
did I escape the country and then I said to them I never escaped the
country. In other words they were just seeking that type of information
thinking that maybe I once escaped the country and yet I said to them no,
I didn't.

MRS MKHIZE: I thank you.

COMMISSIONER: We want to thank you Mr Shabangu. As I have said already to
those who started earlier on, to those who had already witnessed it is
very much difficult actually to have what you can say if a person who has
just actually been experienced these difficulties to be tortured in the
way they did to you. But as I have said that most of our youth they were
actually the people who had more input that we should today be proud of
what we are. We are now ruling ourselves. It is because the young people,
they were actually heros. They came out boldly and they fought against
all the horrible things that we experienced before. We are listening now
as a nation here. We listened to your story and other stories too. We
want to thank you. We want to thank you although you were actually
confronted with these problems, we want to thank you.

	------------------

