


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 05-02-1997				NAME: LAZARUS SHABANGU

HELD AT:	BENONI

DAY 1

----------------------------------------------------------

MR LEWIN: I would just like to remind anyone who still has statements to
make or would like to make statements that there are statement takers.
They are actually upstairs in the room just behind that corner there, if
there are people who would like to either make statements now or who
would like to find out how they can make statements at a later date.	

	And I would now like to call our final witness, Lazarus Shabangu.

	Mr Shabangu can you hear me all right through the earphones?

MR SHABANGU: Yes.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much for being with us for the whole day and for
staying on. I am sorry it has been so long, but it has been a long day
and we would like to thank you.

	Before you give your evidence could you please stand and take the oath.

MR SHABANGU: (sworn states)

MR LEWIN: Mr Shabangu I will myself ask you to tell us your story, which
is one which we have not had examples of today. It refers to the incident
which took place in 1992 concerning yourself on a train and if you could
please in your own time tell us about that experience.

	Thank you.

MR SHABANGU: It was on the 30th of October 1992, in the morning of that
day, at half past five to six. I was working at Clicks next to Denver at
the Trade Centre Building. I just knocked off that morning because I was
attending the night shift. I was using the train for my travelling.

	I was already aboard the train from Denver, which was go to via
Germiston. At Delmore more than 50 men entered the train. Some had
weapons, guns and assegais.

	I used to read novels in the train, struggling books, to want to furnish
myself with information as far as political organisations, the way they
started and where were they headed to.

	This particular book was centred in politics, the very one that I was
reading at the time when the men entered the train.

	There was one young man amongst them and he was sent to me to ask my
name. I told him my name, that I was Lazarus Shabangu. He took the book I
was reading. He actually grabbed it, very indecent. He asked me where I
was from and where I was headed to and why I was reading that particular
book.

	Even before I could answer the very group that I was in, the majority
was women. I started seeing people spreading around at the coach. Before
the twinkling of an eye they took me towards the train door.

	They started assaulting me. They told the youngest guy to hit me with a
clap. They assaulted me. One of them drew out a gun. I heard a loud bang
of noise and gunshots. I heard women screaming and that was the time that
they shot me right here. They shot again twice. The other bullet got
stuck right here on my right hand cheek.

	From there I lost strength, but I could hear them very vaguely, saying
he is dead.

	The train was in motion. One said, let us throw him out of the train.
The door was opened and they threw me out of the train after chopping me
on my forehead. The train was in motion when they threw me out of it.

	I do not know what happened after that, because when I gained my
consciousness I was already admitted to this hospital, asking the
attendant where was I and what had happened? They told me, you are two
weeks in this ward at BBH Hospital.

	I had my parents with me, coming to visit me in hospital. That is it.

MR LEWIN: Thank you Mr Shabangu. Could you tell us a little bit about
yourself. You say you were travelling from Denver to Springs. Is that
where you live?

MR SHABANGU: I reside in Daveyton.

MR LEWIN: What do you do now for a living?

MR SHABANGU: I am still employed at Clicks.

MR LEWIN: So they kept your job open for you?

MR SHABANGU: They once threatened to retrench me but I negotiated and
they accepted me back.

MR LEWIN: Could I ask if you could give us some more details about this
horrible attack in the train. You say there were other people in the
coach when these 15, they were all men were they, when they came in, when
these men arrived? Was the coach quite full?

MR SHABANGU: I will say there were about five women and



two gentlemen that I used to be with and travel with. When I asked about
them they told me that those who were killed were all admitted at BBH,
but they passed away.

MR LEWIN: Was that all the other people in the coach?

MR SHABANGU: You mean the ones who were killed?

MR LEWIN: Yes, or just the...

MR SHABANGU: There were others also who were killed, but there were only
a few of them, because this happened early in the morning.

MR LEWIN: And were they killed in the coach or were they killed by being
thrown out in the same way that you were?

MR SHABANGU: When they shot me I do not know what happened afterwards,
because I lost my consciousness. I did though hear sounds, people
screaming. To me, I will think they attacked them after I was being
thrown out of the coach.

MR LEWIN: When these people came into the coach on the station, was there
anybody there who could defend you, I mean there were not any police or
soldiers on the train to stop them?

MR SHABANGU: There were no police or soldiers.

MR LEWIN: And I mean was it fairly clear to you at once what was
happening? Have you heard of similar incidents before?

MR SHABANGU: Yes I had heard about similar incidents before, that people
were attacked in the train and killed.

MR LEWIN: And when the youngest of them came to you and slapped you
because of the book and took the book away. Did he say anything else, did
they give any indication of what they really were trying to do?

MR SHABANGU: He only asked my name. I told him my name. As to what he was
trying to do I do not know. If he was a thug he could perhaps tried to
rob me of my possessions, but he did not. To me, I think he was after my
life, to kill me with other people in the coach.

MR LEWIN: So they did not seem as they were muggers or thieves.

MR SHABANGU: They had weapons and were fully armed.

MR LEWIN: And what language were they speaking?

MR SHABANGU: They were talking in Zulu.

MR LEWIN: Did they make any particular statement to you or did they just
start attacking?

MR SHABANGU: They only asked me my name and that was all.

MR LEWIN: And now what you would like us to do is to try and find out why
this happened. Is that what you would like?

MR SHABANGU: Yes, I will appreciate that.

MR LEWIN: And in terms of your health, what is the position now? Have you
recovered fully from the attack?

MR SHABANGU: My life has changed, health-wise. I am no longer the Lazarus
at home they knew before and all this change also affected my family at
large. As I am talking, my mom is not feeling well. She does not even
know what is happening and what is taking place with me in my life. 	I
underwent an operation and they extracted one bullet, which penetrated
through my head. Now my life is drastically changed from all that.

MR LEWIN: Is there still another bullet lodged in your head you think?

MR SHABANGU: You mean in my head?

MR LEWIN: Yes.

MR SHABANGU: Yes there is one.

MR LEWIN: You say your life has changed. Do you have to take medication
regularly?

MR SHABANGU: I take pills, tablets quite often and I am afraid they may
cause some other defects in me and at times at night I do not sleep quite
well.

MR LEWIN: Can I ask, do you still travel to work by train? And if you do,
how does it feel now?

MR SHABANGU: Because the violence has come since, after

1994 I told myself that there is nothing I can do. If I die, I die, who
cares?

MR LEWIN: I would just ask the other Commissioners if they have any
questions.

MS SEROKE: Lazarus are you married? Do you have a wife and kids?

MR SHABANGU: No.

MS SEROKE: When you were admitted to the hospital and your parents not
knowing where you were, how long did it take for them to locate your
whereabouts?

MR SHABANGU: They took about a week to discover that I was at hospital.

MS SEROKE: Who told them?

MR SHABANGU: At home they suspected that something was wrong, because I
was delayed, because they have already heard that in the morning
something happened, that train violence took place and that was the very
train that I used to use.

	Also, I had my card and they phoned to my work place to inform them
about me.

MS SEROKE: Do you still live with your parents?

MR SHABANGU: No. My parents are in the Northern

Province. I come from the Northern Province.

MS SEROKE: Thank you Lazarus.

MR LEWIN: Lazarus, just one last question, if I may. When you did get
treatment was that at the Hillbrow Hospital?

MR SHABANGU: Yes they transferred me to Hillbrow Hospital.

MR LEWIN: Because what I would like to suggest, we are very grateful to
you for coming to tell us this story and

we feel very much for the obvious pain that you still feel and there is
nothing specific at this stage that we can recommend. But what we could
recommend is that you yourself find counselling assistance, because I
think that would help you.

	We can make recommendations to our Reparation and Rehabilitation
Committee to assist you, possibly to look at the medical situation again.
But also, to help you psychologically, because clearly you have gone
through a very traumatic time which is affecting you, and that is quite
understandable and what we would like to do is to urge you to keep going.

	The fact that you manage to stay on at the same job is a big plus for
you and we need to congratulate you for that, but we certainly urge that
you look at the possibility of applying for counselling and if necessary,
we will certainly make that recommendation as well.

	So we would like to thank you very much for coming to tell us this story
and sharing it with us and we wish you well. We wish you strength.

	Thank you very much.

MR SHABANGU: Ok. Bye-bye.

MR LEWIN: Thank you.

	If you could just stay there so that I can just announce that we have
come to the end of our hearings here today.

	I would like to thank everybody who has been here for their patience. I
would ask you please just to stay quiet because we will have a formal
closing.

	Before we call on Rev Mbanda just to close the session for us I would
like to express, on behalf of the

Truth and Reconciliation Commission our very deep thanks to the people of
the Benoni City Council, to the Mayor, to the Councillors and others who
have made this possible.

	I would also like to thank the police for the way they have kept us
secure and for the help that they have given.

	I would like to thank all of those who helped make this whole hearing
possible, who helped us with finding the people to make their statements.

	I would like to thank the community groups, particularly Rev Mbanda and
his Committee who have played such an important role in setting up this
Commission, this Commission hearing here.

	I would like to thank the Commission staff themselves who worked, as you
can see, considerably to get everything up and running.

	Thank you, again our faithful interpreters who follow us round, who
never complain and who make it possible for us to make all of these
hearings available to as many people as possible.

	I would also like to thank the media hiding behind the doors for
sticking around, for passing on the stories

and for being very much a part of the hearings.

	And if I could now please ask Rev Mbanda just to formally close the
session for us and if we could all stand. Thank you.

REV MBANDA CLOSES THE SESSION WITH PRAYER.

	



	---































