
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.11.96			NAME: MATILDA SHILABE

CASE: TEMBISA

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: As is usual, I'll ask one of the Commissioners to assist you
in your statement, I'll ask Yasmin Sooka.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, Ms Shilabe, are you able to hear me clearly?

MS SHILABE: Yes I can hear you.

MS SOOKA: Tell me about yourself and how long you've lived in Ivory Park
and how many members there are in your family.

MS SHILABE: I arrived in 1992 at Ivory Park when this incident occurred.
Shots were fired at about three o'clock in the morning whilst we were
asleep. I felt I'm not brave to remain in the house alone then I ran to
my neighbour's house. I found them at the door who were ...(indistinct)
people who were just about to run away.

	I went to the back of this group after hiding myself behind them, shots
were fired at us. After they shot they drove away and then we started
counting those who were injured, I took one of the parents' children on
my back and ran to the hospital. I was not well dressed, then I went
inside my house and got dressed. When we arrived at one section of the
township we went into one house and asked for transport to the hospital.
As we drive past the field we saw this Casper then this man said we must
take another road because those people might shoot at us.

	What I remember on our way to the hospital, we were stopped by a police
vehicle who asked us where we were TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	SHILABE

headed, and we told them people were shot, we told them we don't know by
whom. They said, were AK 47 rifles used, we said we don't know. They left
us then we continued on our route to the hospital. The child to this
mother that I was carrying on my back was not allowed to get into the
hospital so I took this child because her mother was not allowed in. Then
they took x-rays, she was vomiting blood, we went back home afterwards.
We found that Mr Ingwenya had left , he was shot and taken by one man to
the hospital, that's when we went back and that's where the whole story
ends.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, I'm going to ask you some questions just to make
sure that I'm clear. Did you live next to any of the previous witnesses?

MS SHILABE: Yes it is so. I stayed with them.

MS SOOKA: And were you staying alone in your shack?

MS SHILABE: Yes I stayed alone in my shack.

MS SOOKA: So you went to seek shelter in the garage as well?

MS SHILABE: Yes it is so. I left my shack and I ran to the garage.

MS SOOKA: So you also ran with them to the Umfuleni section, is that
right?

MS SHILABE: No I had not yet arrived at the garage when they ran to
Umfuleni section.

MS SOOKA: So you arrived at the shack when they were coming back?

MS SHILABE: I think so because I found them at the garage. MS SOOKA: When
there was this attack on the house, were you able to see any of the faces
of faces of the men who were shooting?

MS SHILABE: I didn't see a thing because I hid myself TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	3	SHILABE

underneath the counter.

MS SOOKA: So all you saw were the gunshots flying around the room?

MS SHILABE: Yes it is correct.

MS SOOKA: And were you at all hurt in this incident?

MS SHILABE: I didn't sustain any injuries.

MS SOOKA: You mentioned that on your way to the hospital you saw a
Casper. Can you tell me what the colour of the Casper was?

MS SHILABE: It was during the night, however it looked sort of dark green
and grey, it was during the night, I couldn't see clearly.

MS SOOKA: And the person that you spoke to, was that a policeman or a
soldier?

MS SHILABE: When we left for hospital, it was a policeman.

MS SOOKA: You mention also that he told you not to go because you might
be shot. Was this a white policeman or a black policeman?

MS SHILABE: It was a mixed group, There were white policemen and black
policemen.

MS SOOKA: What language were they speaking at the time?

CHAIRPERSON: They were speaking Zulu.

MS SOOKA: When you arrived at the hospital you also say that your
neighbour was not allowed into the hospital. Why was this?

MS SHILABE: She was carrying a small child on her back,

there was a room where we were not allowed with small children inside the
hospital. Then I decided to take the child into the hospital, then she
undertook x-rays in the hospital.

MS SOOKA: Did you make any statement to the police after TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	4	SHILABE

this had happened?

MS SHILABE: No. (presumed,no translation here)

MS SOOKA: In your statement you also mention that shacks were burning in
that area. When did you notice that.

MS SHILABE: Before they started shooting there were already shacks
burning.

MS SOOKA: When you returned back home, was your shack still standing?

MS SHILABE: Yes.

MS SOOKA: What was your impression of how many people had been hurt and
how many shacks had been burning?

MS SHILABE: I could not explain how many shacks were burned because that
was not my section where I saw the shacks.

MS SOOKA: So in your section, no shacks had been burned?

MS SHILABE: No there were no shacks burned in our section.

MS SOOKA: In the days that came afterwards, did you speak to anybody else
about this incident?

MS SHILABE: Except my neighbours, I talked to no one.

MS SOOKA: Had all the sections in Ivory been attacked or was it just a
few sections and a few streets?

MS SHILABE: It was about two section which were attacked.

MS SOOKA: And only in the one section, shacks had been burned?

MRS SHILABE: I cannot clearly tell but where I observed was in one
section that shacks were burned.

MS SOOKA: Who did you suspect could these attackers have been?

MS SHILABE: I would be lying, I don't know who attacked us.

MS SOOKA: How many months have you been living in Ivory TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	5	SHILABE

Park before this attack took place?

MS SHILABE: I cannot remember but I think it was about six months.

MS SOOKA: Were you involved in any political activity in the area?

MS SHILABE: No. I was not ever involved in such activities.

MS SOOKA: Did you know your neighbours well before this?

MS SHILABE: Yes they were known to me.

MS SOOKA: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you Mrs Shilabe, I will ask some of our
commissioners to ask you some questions. Commissioner Joyce Seroke,
Commissioner Hugh Lewin?

MR LEWIN: If I could just ask one question which I asked the other two
witnesses, what do you think was happening that night?

MS SHILABE: I do not know because even during the day there was nothing
happening. We heard nothing, when we were asleep during the night we
heard gunshots.

MR LEWIN: And in the discussions you've had afterwards, have you come up
with any ideas yourselves as to what was happening and why?

MS SHILABE: I would be lying, I know nothing. I had just arrived in that
vicinity.

MR LEWIN: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Maybe if I can ask you, is it possible that something like
this happened and you as neighbours, you didn't discuss it to a point of
being much more helpful to the Commission as to what might have happened,
because normally in a residential area, if something like this happens,
people talk a lot about what has happened and that TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	6	SHILABE

will help us a lot as Commission if we can share, even speculations or
whatever the talk that went around that time?

MS SHILABE: To tell the truth, we never discussed this thing, we were
busy treating those who were injured, trying to identify those who were
injured or who sustained injuries, so we didn't get a chance to talk
about this incident.

CHAIRPERSON: Yasmin Sooka.

MS SOOKA: I notice in your statement that you say a relative of yours
died in the attack. Can you tell me who that was.

MS SHILABE: It was a child of my neighbour, where I ran for shelter.

MS SOOKA: To your knowledge, had any attack like this taken place before
in Ivory Park?

MS SHILABE: It had never occurred.

MS SOOKA: So this the first time there was an attack?

MS SHILABE: Yes it was the first time that I have noticed this kind of
attack in Ivory Park.

MS SOOKA: Had there been trouble between the residents of Ivory Park and
any other people?

MS SHILABE: No there has never been any problems with the residents of
other factions.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Manganye, we welcome you. Even though we have organised
that you all sit here at the same time, we will however give each of you
-, we will request you to tell us what you remember about what happened
at that time as far as you can remember.

MRS MANGANYE:	I stayed a bit far from these ladies but my TEMBISA HEARING
	TRC/GAUTENG



	7	MANGANYE

child had visited my friends here. Whilst I was sleeping I heard some gun
shots I woke up and I opened the door and I realised that there were a
lot of lights in the soccer field and I got worried because my child was
not at home.

	We woke up the following morning and went to the field. When we got
there people were lying around there and many people were dead and people
were talking to white policemen who were in a Caspar. I thought maybe it
was an accident that happened there. It was at Umfuleni, but when I went
to my sister's house where my child was sleeping, I couldn't find her but
this lady was sitting outside her door crying, and I asked where the
children are. She said, she does not know but they're at the hospital,
whether they are alive or not, she cannot tell. I started crying as well.

	I went back home and I decided to go to the hospital as well, but when
we got to the hospital we found that people were injured.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you. In your statement you have stipulated a
different time from the others as if you had heard about this around
about a quarter to three. Can you tell us about when this started and
what you heard and when?

MS MANGANYE: I heard some noise of gunshots, it was

round about three o'clock, before three o'clock. When I decided to open
there were some bright lights in the ground, in the open field as if it
was broad daylight but I started to go back in the house, but when we
decided to go to the open field, the following morning, we found people
who were talking there and there we some people who were lying around who
had been injured and some were already taken to hospital.

CHAIRPERSON: The way you explain it, it's as if some TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	8	MANGANYE

people were injured at Umfuleni and some here on the open field, but the
others who testified tell us about those who were injured inside the
garage.

MS MANGANYE: It means that before I went to the garage, I passed the open
field. That's where dead people were lying around, so I thought this
incident only happened in the open field, and then even those who were at
Umfuleni, they were already taken to hospital and I found this lady
sitting outside the garage and crying. But before I can reach the garage,
I have to pass this open field.

CHAIRPERSON: When you say that you started by the field, we know that
it's not an easy thing to try and recall this, but if you can just try
and recall, let your memory, in order to help us, more or less what time
was it when you got to the ground?

MS MANGANYE: It was just before 7 o'clock when I went to the open field,
but the gun shots were in the morning before 3 o'clock.

CHAIRPERSON: I want you to try and remember as to how many people you saw
and just to try and give us a picture in order to help us, because we are
trying to find out about things that we never saw.

MS MANGANYE: I cannot tell you how many people were there because people
were just lying around and I was scared, and as I tried to look further,
the policemen chased us away and even other people, because some people
were saying that, maybe some of their relatives must be lying here, but I
just decided to go to the garage section. That's where I found that
people were injured as well, so I realised that this went as far as
Umfuleni and I realised that my child was taken with the people that were
in the garage to hospital.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	9	MANGANYE

CHAIRPERSON: Do you know this policeman who said people must move.

MS MANGANYE: No, I do not know him.

CHAIRPERSON: Was he a black or a white policeman?

MS MANGANYE: He was a black policeman.

CHAIRPERSON: How many policemen were there?

MS MANGANYE: There were many policemen and some were inside the Caspar.

CHAIRPERSON: The people who were lying down, were they injured or were
they dead already?

MS MANGANYE: They were dead already and some were covered already.

CHAIRPERSON: I heard that you were scared look ...(indistinct), if you
can try and help us and tell us how many people there were?

MS MANGANYE: I didn't see how many people, because even myself, I'm a
coward, I just became scared.

CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell us whether there were two or three in number?

MS MANGANYE: The person that I saw clearly was the person who was lying
on the ground, they shot him and he

was facing towards his shack but most of them were just lying on the
ground.

CHAIRPERSON: You child that you said had visited your sister, how old was
your child?

MS MANGANYE: He was five years old at that time but now he is nine years.

CHAIRPERSON: When you found your child, you found the said lady who told
you that your child is at hospital?

MS MANGANYE: And she gave me my child's card and showed me that my child
is definitely in hospital.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	10	MANGANYE

CHAIRPERSON: When you got to hospital, do you remember in what situation
your child was in?

MS MANGANYE: I found that my child was shot in the leg and the leg was
elevated and my sister's child was also shot as well and the bullet is
still embedded in her body but this lady's child was already dead at that
time. We were not allowed to see her.

CHAIRPERSON: As someone who went into the children's ward, how many
children were shot that day?

MS MANGANYE: I think and it was my child and my sister's child.

CHAIRPERSON: After this were there any means by which you tried to get
some legal representation?

MS MANGANYE: I tried but I realised that you need finance to get a
lawyer, and as I am not working, I could not afford this and I couldn't
even fetch my child from hospital because of finance. I did go to some
lawyers in Kempton Park but they needed finance and I didn't even have
money for transport, and that's when I gave up.

CHAIRPERSON: I thank you. I'll hand over to my colleagues for any further
questions to clarify your

matter. Yasmin Sooka?

MS SOOKA: After all of this happened, were you able to talk to people in
Ivory Park to find out what had happened that night?

MS MANGANYE: I don't know, all I heard was gun shots, as to what
happened, I don't know? There was no fight during that day, there were no
signs of unrest.

MS SOOKA: Had there been unrest in Ivory Park before this incident?

MS MANGANYE: No there was no fighting in Ivory Park before TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	11	MANGANYE

this.

MS SOOKA: What were people saying Mama, after this incident had happened?
Who were they saying had attacked, did people think it was the police,
who did people think were the attackers?

MS MANGANYE: I don't understand.

MS SOOKA: After such an incident, people don't keep quiet about this kind
of thing. They usually discuss it amongst themselves, now what were your
neighbours saying, who did they think had been the attackers?

MS MANGANYE: I think nothing about that.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Mama.

CHAIRPERSON: I would just like to really thank all of you. Before I do
that, Yasmin Sooka has got a question.

MS SOOKA: I have this question for Mrs Mundau. Mama can you tell me, do
you think this attack took place because perhaps your husband was a
member of the community association?

MRS MUNDAU:	I don't think that is the case because the people he was
leading loved him so much and even after this incident they came to help
him.

CHAIRPERSON: Joyce Seroke?

MS SEROKE: Elsie, you said you live nearby the ground, you also said that
when you woke up in the morning you saw many people lying at the ground,
does it mean that this incident started at the ground?

MS MANGANYE: I would say in my opinion, that things might have started at
the ground. I wasn't aware that this incident also occurred at the 15th
houses because it's next to a river. I just saw the hippo standing on the
open ground.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	12	MANGANYE

MS SEROKE: When you were asleep at home, did you hear some noise outside
at the open field?

MS MANGANYE: No I didn't hear anything, I just heard the gunshots at
about 3 o'clock in the morning.

CHAIRPERSON: We will try to request the audience to assist us. If there
are any people amongst you who know about such incidences, to come
forward and give us any information and if they were affected in any
manner to give statements and to give any information relating to these
incidences. As you can see, these women will never be comforted and live
happily in the community unless they know what led to this incident. All
of us today are struggling for a better future. These people came forward
today because they wish to know why this happened and how did this
happen. Everybody who is listening, including the policemen who were in
charge at that time, everybody should come forward to the Commission to
reveal whatever they know relating to that specific day.

	We'd like to thank you ladies with your testimony. We put all of you
here at the same time, not that we don't realise that you all suffer from
pains differently, but we just brought you together seeing that you are
coming to talk about one incident. But we will try as the Commission to
investigate as to what led to the events o f that specific night. We
trust that the community and the policemen will assist us in trying to
solve and to reveal the truth as to what led to this incident. We thank
you very much and we know that such incidents were happening all over in
all communities, they were just meant to scare people, so that even
people who intended to be politically inclined, should be scared. We
thank you very much.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	13	NONDLALA

	We welcome you Mrs Nondlala, we will request you just before your
testimony to stand up to take your oath.

MRS ELSIE NONDLALA: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Can you introduce the person who's accompanying you?

MRS NONDLALA: It's my neighbour.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you very much and we welcome your neighbour as
well. It is wonderful to see that you support each other in such painful
incidents. As it is a tradition we will ask one of our Commissioners to
help you to give your evidence. Your issue, it's one of the things that
were much in question regarding the fight between ANC and IFP. We'll ask
the Commissioner to help you.

MR LEWIN: Thank you madam Chair, Mrs Nondlala, please comfortable, you
are amongst friends. You are going to tell us about an incident that took
place a year before the incident in 1991 involving your son. If you could
in you own time please and in your own words, tell us please what
happened, thank you?

MRS NONDLALA: It was on a Monday, whilst I was at home. My son came, who
was staying in Vusumuzi, he needed food, he told me that he's very
hungry. I wanted he didn't go to work. He told me that they had been
called to the

field. I asked him what's happening, he said, there's a

fight there and he didn't know what the fight was all about. I asked him
who fighting. He said its us Xhosas, the Zulus and the police. Our
weapons are being taken from us but the Zulus' weapons are not being
taken. I said to him, if so, go back home then. He agreed to go back home.

	In the afternoon on the Tuesday two young men came to tell me that
Lennox has passed away. I wanted where this TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	14	NONDLALA

happened. He said at Vusumuzi. I wanted to know what happened? They said
they had gone to collect their clothes, being accompanied by policemen. I
wanted to know how this happened? They said that he stayed in an upper
area and he was going to collect his clothes but he never managed to
leave, but the police found him there and they shot him there on that
spot.

	Thereafter we went to the police station to try and see if they were
there because they were taken by this huge van. When we got there at the
police station we learned that they were taken the very same night to
Boksburg. From the police station we went to the hospital. When we got to
the hospital they told us that they were not there. We left again for
Boksburg Mortuary. When we looked around he was not there. They told us
that there are several mortuaries that we can check. We went to Kempton
Park, he was not there either.

	We proceeded then to other mortuaries. I don't remember them well and we
didn't find him. And then we went to Soweto, they told us a few corpses
were taken to Soweto but they refused that we should go to Soweto so we
came back home. I've finished.

MR LEWIN: Mama, could I just ask some questions, if you

could tell us a little bit more because we weren't there and it's
difficult to understand how such terrible things could happen? If you
could explain, or if you could tell us a little bit about your son. How
old was he, what was he doing and why was he actually in the hostel?

MRS NONDLALA: He was born in 1949.

MR LEWIN: Then he was staying in the hostel, what was he doing there.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	15	NONDLALA

MRS NONDLALA: He was staying at Vusumuzi Hostel.

MR LEWIN: So he wasn't staying at home or in his own home?

MRS NONDLALA: He used to visit during weekends. He was staying on his own.

MR LEWIN: Did he have a job, did he have some employment?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes he was working.

MR LEWIN: Where was he working, can you tell us?

MRS NONDLALA: He was working for the municipality.

MR LEWIN: Doing what?

MRS NONDLALA: He was working in the dumping area.

MR LEWIN: So was that common for people who worked for the municipality
to stay in the hostel?

MRS NONDLALA: I do not know.

MR LEWIN: Was he staying there free?

MRS NONDLALA: They were paying rent.

MR LEWIN: Paying rent, okay. But was it usual for there to be Xhosa and
Zulu speaking people to be together in one hostel?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes Sir.

MR LEWIN: Because this then seemed to have been the cause of, or
particularly the cause of his death. Do you

think that that is the main reason?

MRS NONDLALA: I do not know the reason for his death.

MR LEWIN: But when he came to you on the Monday and told you that the
police had disarmed the Xhosa speaking people. Does this mean that they
were normally armed?

MRS NONDLALA: They were not armed all the time, they were armed simply
because they were called to go to this open field.

MR LEWIN: And why were they being armed for that event?

MRS NONDLALA: They were armed because the Zulus were armed TEMBISA
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	16	NONDLALA

as well, there at the field.

MR LEWIN: So everyone was anticipating that there would be a fight?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes Sir.

MR LEWIN: When the fights tool place, what did the police do, were there
police there and what did they do?

MRS NONDLALA: You mean the police? They were fighting as well. They were
helping the Zulus.

MR LEWIN: So they were actually taking part in the fight?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes they were helping.

MR LEWIN: And where were these police from, do you know that?

MRS NONDLALA: I don't know where they were from, but we would see those
big things that they drive in.

MR LEWIN: And were there other people that were injured or killed at the
same time as your son?

MRS NONDLALA: Many people were injured on that day.

MR LEWIN: How many people were killed?

MRS NONDLALA: I cannot tell you.

MR LEWIN: And then you tell us this horrible story about looking for your
son's body and how you couldn't find it. Was there ever a report made
about the incident, or were you ever asked about it by the police or by
anybody else?

MRS NONDLALA: I never gave any report and even the police never enquired.

MR LEWIN: And nobody ever came to you to offer any information? Did you
check up with other mortuaries as to where your son's body might have
been kept. You mentioned Boksburg, did you go to others yourself?

MRS NONDLALA: I went from mortuary to mortuary looking for my son's body.

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	17	NONDLALA

MR LEWIN: If I could just ask one more question, you mentioned about your
son being in the hostel, was he also a member of a political organisation
at all?

MRS NONDLALA: I don't know whether he was a member of any political
organisation.

MR LEWIN: Thank you very much Mama, I'm sure that there will be other
questions from the other commissioners, thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you very much. We will talk Xhosa because I don't
want to remind you of those Zulu men. I'll ask Joyce Seroke to ask any
questions.

MS SEROKE: Mama, you say the Zulus were armed and the others were armed
as well. What weapons were they, do you know what kind of weapons they
wee?

MRS NONDLALA: Are you talking about our group? They were carrying sticks
and, I don't know what the Zulus were but ours had kieries and pipes.

MS SEROKE: You also say that you went from mortuaries like boksburg,
Kempton Park and when you wanted to try to go to Soweto, were you denied
or did you give up?

MRS NONDLALA: Somebody said we should not go to Soweto because there is
trouble there.

MS SEROKE: Is their no one from your side who said he might still try and
go to Soweto and check the mortuary?

MRS NONDLALA: No, no one did.

MS SEROKE: The one who came to say that your son had gone to fetch his
clothes, was he in his company?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes they were together.

MS SEROKE: Did he mention who did this to your son?

MRS NONDLALA: He said it's the Zulus and the policemen.

MS SEROKE: And how did he manage to escape?

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	18	NONDLALA

MRS NONDLALA: They were staying in a lower area.

MS SEROKE: Did he have a wife.

MRS NONDLALA: No he didn't.

MS SEROKE: Was he not married?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes he was not yet married.

MS SEROKE: ...(indistinct) at home?

MRS NONDLALA: What was the cause of him having to move to hostel, did he
like to stay there?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes he preferred to stay at the hostel.

CHAIRPERSON: Yasmin Sooka.

MS SOOKA: You talked about our group and the Zulus, what was happening in
the hostel that you knew about?

MRS NONDLALA: People were fighting.

MS SOOKA: Why were they fighting?

MRS NONDLALA: I don't know.

MS SOOKA: What did the boy who came back to you tell you about the fights?

MRS NONDLALA: He told me that people were fighting on the other side. I
told him that he must come back if people were fighting and he promised
that he will come

back. That was the last time I saw him.

MS SOOKA:	 Mama, the boys that came to tell you that your son had died,
had they been working at the time when he was killed?

MRS NONDLALA: That's true.

MS SOOKA: Do you know who they are Mama, do you know their names?

MRS NONDLALA:	I don't know them.

MS SOOKA: And have they never been back to see you again?

MRS NONDLALA: Never.

MS SOOKA: They were also involved in the fighting?

TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	19	NONDLALA

MRS NONDLALA: Yes that is true.

MS SOOKA: After your son died when you were looking for the body, were
not you not able to ask them where his body was?

MRS NONDLALA: That's correct.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Mama. Mama did you go to a lawyer or to the church or
anybody to help you?

MRS NONDLALA: I didn't go to lawyers, nor to churches, but however the
church came to help me during the funeral.

MS SOOKA: Which church was that Mama?

MRS NONDLALA: Presbyterian Church.

MS SOOKA: And Mama did you go to your son's employer the municipality to
ask them if they knew anything about the matter?

MRS NONDLALA: Yes I did go to the employer. They said there's nothing
they're going to do if we can't find him.

MS SOOKA: Do you know who the employer was.

MRS NONDLALA: I don't know them very well but I have their particulars.

MS SOOKA: Did they give you any money after all of this?

MRS NONDLALA: No, never.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Mama.

CHAIRPERSON: We like to thank you very much, your story is one of the
painful stories that we heard all over the country. We discover that when
people were fighting, police were also involved, taking sides. However at
the end of the day, most of the black community suffered in these
incidences, but before you leave the Commission I will like you to tell
the Commission about your wishes. Things that you might like the
Commission to do for you. What are your wishes for the Commission, things
that you would like to see TEMBISA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



	20	NONDLALA

happening to make your spirit rest.

MRS NONDLALA: I'm troubled because I can't find my child and I don't know
what I'm going to do.

CHAIRPERSON: We'd like to thank you and we'll try and investigate your
case, and we'll also try and keep in contact with you before we've
finished the investigation.

Those who came here to get paid, we are informed that we have to tell
them to go to Kopaneng Section, that's where they are going to paid. The
people who help witnesses, I'm referring to briefers, we will like to ask
them at this moment to accompany the witness out, taking them to where
they are going to get their tea, and they should be followed by those who
assist witnesses or their relatives. I would like to ask one of the
briefers to direct them to the tea room. We will be back at half past
eleven. Thank you.

	---------------------

