	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION




	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



DATE:		25.09.1996 NAME: EMILY SIKO

CASE: 1566			 KLERKSDORP

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

PROF MEIRING: Can you hear me, Mrs Siko? I would like to extend a word of
very warm welcome to you. Thank you for coming and telling us your story
today. You have brought somebody with you. Would you like to introduce us
to her?

MRS SIKO: This is my sister, the wife to my brother, Sarah Bangoshay and
I am Emily Siko in Venstersdorp.

PROF MEIRING: I would like to say a word of welcome to your sister. Thank
you, Madam, that you also came to us. Mrs Siko, before you tell your
story as is the case with all the other people who come to testify, all
the other witnesses, will you please stand to take the oath.

EMILY SIKO: (Duly sworn, states).

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much. Now Dr Randera will guide you through
your testimony.

DR RADERA: Mrs Siko, good afternoon.

MRS SIKO: I greet you, Sir.

DR RADERA: Are you comfortable?

MRS SIKO: I am very comfortable, thank you.

DR RADERA: Mrs Siko, before you tell us what happened also to you on the
night of the 11th of May 1991, in Ventersdorp, can you please tell us
something about yourself. Are you married?

MRS SIKO: I am married, I have six children, four boys and

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	E SIKO

two girls. My husband works at African Asphalt as a contractor. I am
working as a domestic worker at Koos van Staden's place.

DR RADERA: Thank you, Mrs Siko. Are you a member of any political
organisation?

MRS SIKO: No, I do not belong to any political organisation.

DR RADERA: Can you explain to us what happened to you on that night of
the 11th of May 1991?

MRS SIKO: Before the 11th, it was in 1990, on the 16th of December, there
were people who were staying at municipal's place, we were working at
municipal's work. They bought them houses to stay there. Then on the 16th
the boers said to them they should leave to look for their place. Because
they were saying there are people who just stay there. Those who are not
supposed to be there should leave. Then these people went to the office
to ask for a site, for sites to Mr Salty Visser. When they arrived there
he said to them he has no place, he has not yet allocated sites. Then I,
I was on the list, then the location was Kayeletu. Then I was on the last
street. People, those people stayed there and they went to ANC members to
look for sites from them. These people took them and put them just next
to me. It was on the road, and they put them on the other road. When I
knocked off from work, then I saw people moving. My husband and my cousin
hired a van. Then they asked them to be together.

	When I arrived the municipal White workers were on a white van and
hiding themselves. When I arrived at them they said to me I should not
tell anybody that they have seen me. I agreed. Then when I arrived at
home this van

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	E SIKO

arrived also. Then I brought my next-door's furniture. Then I told wife,
my husband and said those White people said I should not tell anybody.
Then I told my cousin that he should wait until these White people leave,
then he should not tell people, then I am going to cook food for you to
eat. My cousin said I am not able to take the furniture. Then they were
using the wheelbarrows.

	Then after Christmas, it was in 1991, we stayed there, it was January,
February, March, April. Then during May, on the 7th, they entered. They
were putting the axes. It was on a Tuesday. Then I asked Mrs Pulema's
where are the people putting the axes? They were saying they wanted to
bring the dust bins. So I said that's okay. When the axes were put in,
they were put in by Gosimang, who was working in the municipal offices.
They were put in on Tuesday. On Wednesday they were writing names of
people for the houses with axes, they were saying how many people are
there in the houses, how many men, how many boys, how many girls. This
next-door neighbour of mine would say I am scared, because they are
asking how many boys are staying in the house. Maybe they were saying
they are coming to help us.

	On Thursday it was Pentecost. I was from work and then my mistress
brought me home. Then there were so many houses, they were writing on a
board, writing AWB. I didn't understand that these people would assault.
But they went to Skietbaan and then my mistress asked that we should pass
through. Then they - on Friday, I went to work. I came back from work.
Then I slept. It was at daybreak at about quarter to five. I could hear
some sounds on the roof. I was sleeping with my child who is five years.
My husband was not there. Then other people were sleeping in the other

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	E SIKO

shack house next-door. Then I looked and said what's that. They were
throwing tear-gas, and when they looked I could see that there are
clouds. Then I said no, it is rain, sleep well. When I said it is rain, I
could feel the sound hitting on the door. Then I stood up and shouted who
are you, because I was surprised to see this person is kicking the door.
They were axing the door. They were saying AWB, we have no place here,
this is our place, this is our place for our nation. Then I said, please
"baas", I didn't put myself here, but somebody sent me to stay here. Then
they hit me with a brick.

DR RANDERA: Take your time, all right. Can you please give the lady some
water to drink, please.

MRS SIKO: And this child of mine was holding me tightly. Then I covered
him with my hands. They were hitting me from the bed, then I hit the
wardrobe. Because I was saying I am paying here, what is the problem.
They said to me this is not my place. Then I said I have the number. Then
I said it is No 11. Then this Kosimang, they light with the torch. Then
the other one pulled a knife. Then when he held the knife, I fell on my
baby, because I said please don't kill me, who is going to take care of
my children.

	Then I knelt down. Then I thought he was going to stab me at the back of
my neck. Then I just said I will just hear where he is going to stab me.
Then at the time when he was stabbing, he was stabbing me on the waist.
Then he stabbed me with the knife. I could feel it when it went out. Then
Salty said I brought you here with whom. Then I said "baas" Salty, I am
paying here. Then he pulled the knife off again. They stabbed my child on
the right leg. Then they cut off the veins at the back. Then she said
they have KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	E SIKO

stabbed me. Then I said just keep quiet. Then he said please keep quiet,
you can see how Whites are in here. Then they were stabbing. The clothes
I was wearing at that time had eight holes. Then they took the brick and
hit me again. I wanted to see this Black person who was with them. Then I
looked. Then they hit me on the head. Then my daughter fainted. Salty
then said to me I told you not to be lenient with these people, you
should have killed them. They went out, they said sorry, we were at the
wrong number. As they left I followed them, carrying my child in my hands
and I didn't realise that the time that Tomilos' legs were stabbed and
the muscle was cut off.

	I went to the next-door neighbour to call the boys. I asked them where
are you. they said we are here. I said aren't you injured? They said no,
we are fine. I said please go and call a nurse called Koba to come with a
Kombi to take my child to the hospital.

	When they left they were not running. They didn't have guns with them.
They had knives and plastic batons and they jumped into the next-door
shack. I was still shouting, crying for help. I said people, come and
help me, the Whites have killed my child. I sent my son to the office,
that is the child who came back with the police and they took me to their
office. They applied their first-aid and they stitched my child. They
didn't stop the blood that was flowing. They couldn't even stitch me
properly. They didn't even give us an injection. (Indistinct) and Johnny
were the people taking my statement. I said to them the White people
assaulted us. They said you are lying, where do the Whites come from? It
is the comrades who assaulted you.

	I was taken to the hospital by my in-laws, telling me

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	E SIKO

that the blood doesn't want to stop flowing. Then we should better go to
the hospital.

	David Letgoto, who is the CID said they had better take me to Motala and
Motala would take me to the hospital. My father took me to Van Rensburg
and Van Rensburg didn't want to examine me. He said I am going to inject
her with a fatal injection and my in-law requested Sister Koba to come
and pick me up, to transport me to Sepong Hospital. When I was released
from the hospital, I was given the documents. You know I couldn't stand
for quite a long time because of my leg. I have been for treatment now
and then.

	I went to Mogorosi to enquire about the statement I gave them. I told
them I am injured and my child was still very little and was also
injured, what should I do. They said nothing, we do not know. After a
week of my discharge from the hospital, a clerk from Ventersdorp, Herman
told me to come to town and that he is going to give me R17 000,00. I
should go to town, I will see a grey Cressida and I should come with him
to the park. I said to him I cannot walk. He said try all the means you
have, because I want to help you. I was so scared and I thought he would
kill me. I didn't go. 	The policeman who took the statement from me,
never came to me, even if I go to the police station, nobody gives me any
attention. And I was innocent. I will stop just there.

DR RANDERA: Thank you, Mrs Siko. You told us how you recovered. Is your
child all right as well?

MRS SIKO: His leg, the leg is crippled. He has a problem, he cannot stand
for a long time, he cannot walk properly. He is now a cripple. Now my
waist - at Klerksdorp they said the injection they have put in me is
poisonous, and my waist KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	E SIKO



is painful when it is cloudy.

DR RANDERA: How old was your child at that time? The one that was stabbed?

MRS SIKO: He was five years.

DR RANDERA: Now I just want to understand. You were already staying -
what is this area called, sorry - we keep on talking about this area
where you lived?

MRS SIKO: The place is called Khayeleto.

DR RANDERA: Khayeleto?

MRS SIKO: Yes.

DR RANDERA: Is it still existing?

MRS SIKO: No, they have, all the people have been removed, it is now
Extension 3.

DR RANDERA: How many people were staying there when this attack took
place that night? How many families, how many homes were there already?

MRS SIKO: It was a location. We hired it from the people, they took us
from the people and gave us our own area, our own sites.

DR RANDERA: You also mention in your statement, besides Mr Kosigomang,
you mentioned Mr Visser who was the local clerk of the town. Is that
right?

MRS SIKO: Yes, that's true.

DR RANDERA: Now you say in your statement that he too was present when
the houses were attached.

MRS SIKO: He was there, because he was saying they entered in the wrong
number. They could have got to the houses which have axes, but they went
to my house which is No 11.

DR RANDERA: Are these two people still working for the local council?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	E SIKO

MRS SIKO: Yes, they are still working at the municipal offices, and
Visser is still there. The person whom I don't understand is who is still
working, is Simani. So that office has been removed from the township to
town. So I am not sure whether he is still working for the municipality.

DR RANDERA: In your statement you say that the perpetrators were wearing
military uniforms with an AWB emblem. You saw that very clearly?

MRS SIKO: Yes, I saw them clearly, they were dressed in brown trousers
for soldiers and they had maroon badges. They were having an eagle and
even an eagle on their head.

DR RANDERA: Did you recognise any of these people?

MRS SIKO: I could only remember Salty Visser and I know th way he talks,
because he is stammering all the time and then he is the one who says it
is the wrong number, and Simon who said it is the wrong number. Visser
said he must not kill the children. Then I was looking at him, then he
hit me with something.

DR RANDERA: Thank you ma'am. I just want to come to this question of this
grey Cressida and R17 000,00. You mentioned somebody's name in
relationship to that. What was the name that you mentioned?

MRS SIKO: His name is Herman. I don't know whether this Herman is the
surname or the name, because he was saying Mr Herman. Then I could
understand the person who is his domestic worker is Sophie Sauer, so it
is the people who was able to identify him. So he is no more there, he is
now in the Cape.

DR RANDERA: So Sophie introduced you to Mr Herman?

MRS SIKO: Yes, she can give a lot of information about this name Hermanm,
as to whether it is a surname or it is just a

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	E SIKO

name, but they used to call him Herman.

DR RANDERA: Now at the end of all this you did lay a charge at the police
station. Is that right?

MRS SIKO: Yes, I went to the police station but nobody paid any attention
to me. As I was relating my story, they said go back to the township,
your comrades assaulted you. I asked them which comrades, because Salty
gave me that side.

DR RANDERA: And you heard nothing from them after that?

MRS SIKO: Nothing, Sir.

DR RANDERA: Thank you very much, I have no further questions. Prof
Meiring?

PROF MEIRING: Just one question, Mrs Siko, and that is to do with the -
you said there was a man, I think you said Dr Van Rensburg, who didn't
want to treat you, and there was some mention of a fatal injection he
wanted to give you. Can you please repeat that?

MRS SIKO: He said to my father - my father said to him I have a patient
here and this person is weak, she cannot even stand on her own, and Van
Rensburg gave him an answer. He said we have given them the stitches, now
what do they want here? And he said to my father okay, just put her on
the bed, I am going to give her a further injection to kill her. And I
didn't lie on the bed.

PROF MEIRING: Do you think that was an attempt at a joke or was he
serious in saying that?

MRS SIKO: Van Rensburg?

PROF MEIRING: Yes.

MRS SIKO: He wasn't making any jokes, because he was so angry when we
went into his surgery. He was angry as he was talking to my father. My
father tried to be a very humble man and he said I am not going to touch
this girl, she was

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	E SIKO

assaulted by the comrades. I said I was assaulted but Salty gave me the
side. He said lie on that bed, I will give you a fatal injection to kill
you. Then we just went back to the township and my mother-in-law
requested Sister Koba to call the ANC people to transport me, and they
came to transport me with my child to Sepong Hospital.

PROF MEIRING: Was this Van Rensburg a medical doctor?

MRS SIKO: Yes, he is now on pension. He went on pension last year.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you, no more questions.

DR RANDERA: Mr Manthata?

MR MANTHATA: If I understood you very well, you even tried to go to
Motala?

MRS SIKO: No, no, we didn't try any attorney. We didn't try any attorney.
I went to the police station and I came back. They didn't pay any
attention to me. Even the statement-takers told me that there was nothing
they knew and I didn't pursue this matter further.

MR MANTHATA: What is very surprising, is this issue of an attack on that
night because some people in this area work, are employed by these
attackers.

MRS SIKO: Yes, some of them are working for these attackers.

MR MANTHATA: In other words, the same employers were attacking the
employees?

MRS SIKO: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: And they were the same people who transferred the assaulted
people to Dr Van Rensburg?

MRS SIKO: Correct.

MR MANTHATA: Do you think there is a possibility of reconciliation with
these people?

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	E SIKO

MRS SIKO: No, I don't think so.

MR MANTHATA: Are they still present at Ventersdorp as we are talking?

MRS SIKO: Yes.

MR MANTHATA: I thought you said one of them moved to Cape Town?

MRS SIKO: Yes, Herman moved to Cape Town.

MR MANTHATA: I will ask you this question again. Do you think these
people are Christians, the AWB?

MRS SIKO: They have their own church, they built it in Ventersdorp.

MR MANTHATA: Are you Christians?

MRS SIKO: Yes, I am a Christian. I attend the Anglican Church.

MR MANTHATA: Is there any communication between your ministers and their
ministers?

MRS SIKO: No.

MR MANTHATA: Are you saying no or you do not know?

MRS SIKO: No, the AWB people don't mix with other ministers from other
churches.

MR MANTHATA: I thank you.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Siko, is there anything else you would like to say?

MRS SIKO: I just have a problem with my child. I would like them to pay
for what they did to my son. The child is going to be a cripple for a
lifetime.

DR RANDERA: Mrs Siko, thank you very much for sharing your story with us.
In going through all the statements that we have had from this area,
many, many people have talked of the role that what is referred to as the
right-wing in our country, the role that they played in many instances.
This

KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	12	E SIKO

morning from Bloemhof, the statements from Coleni, you are from
Ventersdorp. There was the story of the lady whose school was bombed and
again the possibility of the right-wing involvement was raised there. As
you know we have actually asked other political parties to come and make
submissions to the Truth Commission. Perhaps we should be asking the AWB
as a movement and as a party to also come and talk about their
involvement and their ideas of what was happening in that particular
period. It, of course, does not help your appeal about your child. We
have noted that and we will come back to you on that. Thank you very much
for coming and talking to us today.

PROF MEIRING: Thank you very much, Mrs Siko.



	---------------

































KLERKSDORP HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG



