	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 22.07.1996 		NAME: ANTOINETTE SITHOLE

CASE: SOWETO.

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

THE COMMISSION COMMENCES WITH PRAYERS

MS SOOKA: Thank you Fathers, thank you. I would like to welcome to the
proceedings today the Premier of our Province, Mr Tokyo Sexwale and I
would ask him to rise please so that people can recognise him.

	The process that we normally use in these hearings is that we call
witnesses to the stand. They are usually accompanied by a briefer, who is
either a trained counsellor or a mental health worker to assist them in
the proceedings. They may also be accompanied by friends or family. The
witnesses then take the oath and we, as is our practice, we assign one of
the Commissioners or Committee members to assist them with the telling of
their evidence.

	We would like to remind people that these are victim hearings and that
in terms of section 11 of the Act victims are to be treated with dignity,
compassion, so therefore they must be allowed to tell their stories in
absolute quiet.

	Unpleasant though it may be I would like to remind you as well that in
terms of the Act I have the power to have anybody removed from this hall
if they create a disturbance. 	I would now like to present my fellow
commissioners and Committee members to you so that you may know who they
are for the process for this day. They are Mr Hlengiwe Mkhize, the
Chairperson of the Reparation and Rehabilitation

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2

Committee. Mr Tom Manthata a member of the Reparation Committee on my
extreme right. Mr Hugh Lewin, a member of the Human Rights Violation
Committee.

	Today is a very special day for the Truth Commission. For many of us
Soweto '76 is a time remembered in our history. We know the evidence that
has gone to previous commissions, however, what we want to do today is to
get the story behind Soweto. The story of the human beings who lived in
Soweto. I would like to ask my fellow commissioner Hlengiwe Mkhize to
present the witnesses for today to us.

MS MKHIZE: I will first introduce our Chairperson. She is Miss Yasmin
Sooka who is a Deputy Chairperson of the Human Rights Violation. She is
the one who is going to Chair. 	Lady Chair I want to take this
opportunity to present to you and this Commission and the audience the
names of the witnesses who will be testifying before the Commission
today, Monday the 22nd of July 1996 here at Regina Mundi.

	Our first witness, whom I am going to present to you, is Antoinette
Sithole who will be representing the late Hector Petersen. Also
Antoinette will be accompanied by Sam Nzima who is a journalist who will
give supporting evidence.

	The second witness will be a well-known Soweto citizen Mamma Kuzwayo,
that is L M Kuzwayo, who will be representing herself, not so much as a
survivor but as a community leader at the time, who held a particular
position and who has got a perspective to share.

	The third witness will be Amelia Molapo who will be representing herself
as it is alleged that she was shot by the police and got paralysed on
that day.

	The fourth witness is Dan Montsisi who will be representing himself just
giving a perspective as a person

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	

who was in student leadership at that time.

	The next witness will be Dorothy Seatlholo, who will be representing our
hero Sydney Maphalala who is alleged should have been shot dead on that
day.

	Then we will have Peter Magubane, a journalist at that time, well-known
for his good work.

	And then we will have Virginia Mashinini who will give a perspective of
Tsea Mashinini's involvement.

	And then we will have Fanyana Mazibuko who also will give a perspective
of what he saw and he noticed on that day.

	We have also Dorothy Tshabalala who will be representing Mzwake
Tshabalala who was detained, hospitalised and disabled.

	We will also be having Gabu Tugwana, who is a journalist, who will be
giving a perspective of his involvement during those days.

	And we also have Janet Goldblatt who is Dr Edelstein's daughter who I
should think is one of the people who has drawn the world's attention to
what happened on June 16 1976.

	We have also Matsidiso Photolo who will be representing Wike Sanco
Patolo who is alleged to have been shot by the police in Benoni.

	We also have Reverend Dale White who is going to give a perspective of
the Church's involvement in supporting people who were directly affected
around and after the 16th of June in 1976.

	Having introduced all the witnesses I will go on to ask the first
witness, which is Antoinette Sithole, and I will ask also that Sam Nzima
sit next to the witness. I hand it

SOWETO HEARING	over/...

	4	A SITHOLE

over back to the Chair.

MS SOOKA: I now call Antoinette Sithole and Sam Nzima to take the stand
please. Before we begin I would like to explain that it is customary of
the Commission to ask the witnesses to speak in the language that they
are comfortable with. To assist people with understanding we have
provided interpretation services. These items are available for people
who do not understand Sotho or Zulu. Please make sure that you collect a
pair so that you are comfortable with the evidence as it is being led. I
would also like our people who are here in the hall to make sure that as
many people as possible receive these earphones and headsets.

	During this period I would also like to thank Peter Magubane and Sam
Nziva for mounting the photo exhibition that we have at the back of the
hall. Thank you.

ANTOINETTE SITHOLE: (sworn states)

MS SOOKA: If I may ask you to rise as well please. Could you please put
the headphones on.

SAM NZIMA: (sworn states)

MS SOOKA: As is customary with the Commission we have made sure that
there is a Commissioner to assist you with the leading of your evidence.
I will be doing that for both of you and I will start with Antoinette
first. Please feel free to tell the story in your own words. You may
speak in the language of your choice because I will be able to hear you
in the translation. The translation is to assist me and my fellow
commissioners and committee members and not yourself. But if you have a
problem with hearing please let me know. Could we have quiet please so
that we may begin. Antoinette are you comfortable?

MS SITHOLE: Yes.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	5	A SITHOLE

MS SOOKA: You may now begin to tell your story. Please press the red
button when you want to speak and you can press the other one to switch
it off.

MS SITHOLE: Okay.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

MS SITHOLE: It was on the 16th of June as we were marching against the
Afrikaans. When we arrived at Pafeneng there was confusion. There were
police. They threw us with tear gas. We ran away and we hid ourselves.
While we were hiding we found the police, they were on the other side
Andy Thomas Hall and then we went out. While we were still standing
outside there was someone coming in front of the school, and who is this
person? And I thought this is Hector. I called Hector. I said to Hector
he should not, and we go back home.

	There was a gun sound. There was teargas and there was confusion. I saw
people hiding themselves and then I hid myself too. While we were
standing there I then - I was afraid because I didn't know where Hector
has gone to and people were holding something. And then I moved forward
and I could not see properly, and I saw Hector's shoe.

	Mr Makubu said and ran. While he was running I asked where are you
going. He said there's a clinic just nearby. While we were running
someone stopped in front of us, this car, my mother came out from the car
and she said put him inside the car, I will assist you. Mr Makubu was
carrying Hector and said Hector is dead.

	When we arrived at the clinic we found a doctor there. When the doctor
went on he said there is nothing I can do. He asked me the names, who I
am. After that I stayed there in the clinic without knowing what to do.
There came two

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	6	A SITHOLE

women who were teachers and they went home with me.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. I am going to ask you some questions for
clarification please. Could you tell me whether Hector was a member of
any student organisation at the time?

MS SITHOLE: No he was not a member of any organisation.

MS SOOKA: So Hector got caught in the crossfire?

MS SITHOLE: I think now that we were marching, most of the
schoolchildren, we only went to the secondary schools and high schools,
so maybe because of curiosity kids from all these lower primary schools
they all followed us. So something like that really.

MS SOOKA: How old was Hector at the time?

MS SITHOLE: He was 12 years old and he was to be 13 in August.

MS SOOKA: How old were you at the time?

MS SITHOLE: I was 17 years old.

MS SOOKA: What has happened to you since, what do you do?

MS SITHOLE: In 1977 we had a ...(indistinct) just to keep us busy and
away from the street. So I was doing that. And after that I got married
and I left my husband and I got - I am married now again. So my life is
not so much well really.

MS SOOKA: How do you feel about the fact that so many years after June
'76 we now have a new government, do you feel that Hector's death in any
way contributed to what we have today?

MS SITHOLE: Of course it did, it did contribute very, very much.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. I will ask my fellow commissioners and committee
members whether they want to ask you any questions. Thank you very much.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	7	A SITHOLE

MR MANTHATA: Antoinette at the time in what class were you, that is in
what form were you?

MS SITHOLE: I was doing form 2.

MR MANTHATA: And at that time what subjects were you doing in Afrikaans?

MS SITHOLE: It was mathematics, biology and geography.

MR MANTHATA: Was it easy and pleasant to receive lessons in that language?

MS SITHOLE: No it was not easy and it was not pleasant.

MR MANTHATA: We have here Umbiswa Makubu who was seen carrying Hector
Petersen, how long had you known him before this occasion?

MS SITHOLE: I never knew Mr Umbiswa. I only saw him that minute and it
was the end.

MR MANTHATA: What happened to the students, that is those who were
marching towards the end of the day? Did they march the whole day?

MS SITHOLE: No they didn't march the whole day, we were interrupted by
the police.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you. No further questions.

MR LEWIN: Antoinette could I ask, you must have re-lived this whole
experience many, many times since - well in the last 20 years, thinking
back on it now do you feel any- what are your feelings about that,
looking back on it now?

MS SITHOLE: At first I was very, very angry, but later I realised that no
Hector didn't die in vain really, because all what we wanted was the
language must be changed and the later generations would enjoy their
school, because we couldn't enjoy school because of this Afrikaans. So I
am very happy now because things have changed.

MR LEWIN: Thank you.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	8	A SITHOLE

MS MKHIZE: Thank you. Antoinette partly while you were organising this we
had many people asking us as to what we hoped to achieve since so much
has been said about June 16, and our response has been we hope from
people like yourselves we will be able to get the details that have not
been depicted anywhere. I will ask you just to share with the Commission
and the audience as to what kind of information emerged at that time
around Hector's funeral, whatever you can think of if you look back. The
people who came to visit your family, the speeches that were made,
whatever you think might be significant which you can recollect. I know
it's a difficult thing but it might be of use for this Commission to get
a clearer picture.

MS SITHOLE: Ja there were people that were coming at my grandmother's
place and they all talked about that one day we will be free of which it
was really encouraging, because I think most of the people didn't think
that June 16th really gave us freedom you know because we were kids. So I
think most of the people were talking about freedom and that we will one
day win this battle of apartheid.

MS MKHIZE: Did young people who were with him at school at that time, you
said he was 12, did they also have a similar perspective, what was their
reaction, were they also hopeful at that time as early as the age of 12?

MS SITHOLE: I think they were confused actually because most of the kids
by that age they were not really in politics so maybe they heard elderly
people talking about that but you know how kids are. I think they were
confused, they couldn't understand.

MS MKHIZE: Also of importance for this Commission is to assist the
government to make sure that in this country we

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	9	A SITHOLE

don't ever leave with a situation where we say a person at the age of 12
was killed. I suppose you have been talking with your family members
about this, what kind of advice would you give, what should be done? How
should the present government deal with young people when they are
protesting or rioting?

MS SITHOLE: I think the important things before the government, as
parents, parents should actually tell or teach children that education is
important. We may have politicians in the kids, maybe the kids may turn
to be politicians, but education is the key to freedom. So I think we
must tell the youth to leave drugs and all these funny things that they
are doing to concentrate on education. In that way we will be a better
nation.

MS SOOKA: Thank you Antoinette. Sam will you now tell us your account of
what happened on June the 16th and the subsequent days, and particularly
how you came to take that picture which was splashed across the world?

MR NZIMA: In June 16 1976 students started to march from Naledi High
School. They were targeted to the High School to march in protest against
the medium of instruction in Afrikaans. The march started from there
moving down to Skanentwana, Gungenyane, Morris Isaacson and Orlando West
High which is Madziki High School. On arriving there while they were
still waiting for the other students to come out, of course their march
was a peaceful one from the beginning, the students were carrying the
placards which were written that "We are not educated but certificated",
"Afrikaans must be abolished", "We are being fed by the crumbs of
Education", those were the placards written carried by the students
marching towards Orlando West High where they were

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	10	S NZIMA

waiting for the other students to come out to join the march.

	While they were still waiting there for the students to come out one of
the students came running and he said "Police are coming in a big convoy,
watch out". He was warning the other students. When the police arrived in
seven vans and one big truck one White man who was in a police uniform
carried his stick in his armpit which I think he was a major warned the
students that they must disperse immediately. 	The students started
singing Nkosi Sikelele Afrika and then again the second warning he said I
am giving you three minutes to disperse here.

	The students continued singing Nkosi Sikelele Afrika and it was hardly
three minutes when he pulled out his firearm and he shot directly at the
students. Now all hell broke loose. All these policemen were shooting at
the students randomly.

	During the shooting I saw a student fall down and another student picked
him up and I rushed there to take a picture. I took six sequence shots of
that picture of the student, whom we later discovered that was Hector
Petersen, and another student by the Umbiswe Makuba picked Hector
Petersen up and Antoinette, the sister who is next to me here of Hector
Petersen, she was crying hysterically alongside where Makuba was carrying
Victor Petersen running towards the direction where our Press car was
parked.

	After taking those pictures I helped Antoinette and Umbiswa Makuba to
put Hector Petersen in the Press car to be taken to the Pafene clinic
where he was certified dead by the doctor.

	On that afternoon Soweto was on fire, many things

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	11	S NZIMA

happened. The same afternoon the picture of Hector Petersen was published
in all the local newspapers and abroad as well as the television.	The
students were harassed on that all over Soweto and even the East Rand.

	Because of that picture of Hector Petersen which was used in the Press I
was a victim of the police harassment. I was therefore compelled to leave
my job as a journalist to hide in the Eastern Transvaal, which is now
known as Mpumalanga. I couldn't stay alone there but my wife she was a
sister at Baragwanath Hospital, she was also forced to leave her job and
join me there in hiding. Because of that picture I lost my job. I was
frustrated, I couldn't be a journalist anymore. Because had I stuck to
journalism I was going to be shot or locked up in jail.

	The other group, the owners of the World Newspapers and the Star
exploited me a lot, because they did not pay me a cent for that picture.
The picture circulated throughout the whole world which I believe the
other group is ripping the royalties of that picture.

	Political organisations or liberation movements are also using that
picture very extensively. Some of them they did not even know who took
the picture, but they are benefitting out of that picture.

	I do believe now since it's a new South Africa, a new government they
will recognise my work which has contributed to change in South Africa
when it comes to the education of the children of South Africa. I lost my
job because of that picture. I am no longer a journalist. I am in a small
business which is also no longer functioning very well down there in the
Eastern Transvaal. That's what happened on June 16 1976.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	12	S NZIMA

MS SOOKA: Thank you. I'd like to ask you a few questions please for
clarification. On that particular day were you alerted to what was going
to happen prior to the march taking place, how did you come to be where
you were, where the march was taking place?

MR NZIMA: Yes. I was assigned to cover the march by our late editor Percy
Gobozo who told me on Tuesday afternoon that tomorrow morning, which was
Wednesday there will be a march of the students to protest against the
medium of instruction which was Afrikaans. So that morning I woke up
early to Naledi High School to start the march with the students. I
marched with them from Naledi High up to Orlando West High.

MS SOOKA: Could you tell me whether your editor knew, before he had
assigned you to covering the march, whether he was aware of the fact that
there was going to be this march which would take this particular
direction or was it simply a march which was meant to start as a protest,
could you tell us a little bit more about that please?

MR NZIMA: We did not predict any danger or anything that is going to
happen to take the student's life or anybody's life. We thought that is
going to be a peaceful march because the students were just protesting,
arm-less, just carrying their placards, that was written all they wanted
to get.

MS SOOKA: Living in the township were you aware of the tensions that were
seething at the time which gave vent to this protest march?

MR NZIMA: There was no tension prior to this march but the tension and
everything started after the march and the shooting of the students.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	13	S NZIMA

MS SOOKA: Do you think that the police were prepared, in a sense, to deal
with this march?

MR NZIMA: Yes they were prepared to deal with this march, because that
was my first time to see the casper which we called a hippo. We did not
know when did they get this big vehicle to come and shoot at the students
at that time. It was immediately after Hector Petersen was shot down, we
saw a big convoy of caspers coming to Soweto and everybody was teargassed
at the place where the shooting took place.

MS SOOKA: When the policeman who was in charge gave the order to fire,
besides giving the students a warning to disperse did he not attempt to
use any other methods of getting them to disperse, for instance by using
teargas or rubber bullets, or was the first instruction simply for them
to disperse and in the next few minutes the order came to shoot?

MR NZIMA: Nothing else was used except the live ammunition which was used
to shoot the student direct and they did not shoot in the air, they shot
direct to the students. I was there, I saw it.

MS SOOKA: In your opinion the shooting was meant to kill?

MR NZIMA: Correct, it was meant to kill.

MS SOOKA: As a Black journalist you were able to move around quite freely
in the townships because what we do have which has come to us through
reports at the time is that journalists, other than black journalists are
not allowed to enter the townships, could you tell us about what happened
and whether you covered anything else after that particular day?

MR NZIMA: From the beginning students were very friendly with the
journalists, but later the student becomes arrogant SOWETO
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	14	S NZIMA

and they are furious to see the journalist taking pictures. Because what
happened is that the police used to make cuttings from the newspapers'
pictures and hunt for this student carrying the pictures of the student.
So from there the relationship between the journalist and the student was
bad. In Soweto the community were accepting the journalists but the
students were not.

MS SOOKA: Would you agree that a possible explanation for that could have
been that the taking of their photograph exposed them to the system at
the time?

MR NZIMA: That was the correct thing.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. I will ask my fellow Commissioners and Committee
members whether they want to ask you any questions.

MR MANTHATA: Mr Nzima do I understand you well to say that since the
picture you took and the march you saw there was never peace amongst the
students in Soweto?

MR NZIMA: After the picture was taken, yes, there was never peace in
Soweto.

MR MANTHATA: Even at that time was it possible to get shots, snaps,
photos of the police confronting the students, what I mean is that there
was a continued confrontation between the police and the students, was it
possible to catch such scenes as you were moving around?

MR NZIMA: It was very, very impossible. I got a warning that once they
can get me again at the rioting place they are going to shoot me. They
wanted me to come to John Vorster's 10th Floor for interrogation. That's
the thing that made me run away from Johannesburg to go to the Eastern
Transvaal. The police were harassing the journalists. I remember one day
we were at Naledi Station looking for the,

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	15	S NZIMA

following the pictures while they were shooting other students there and
the police shot at our Press car. The bullet went through the car and
nobody was injured in that car. We ran away and we left that place
because the police were now hunting for the Press, not to take them
pictures anymore, because we were exposing what was happening. The job,
dirty job was done by the police in Soweto.

MR MANTHATA: What about the community at that time, was it possible to
get communities that were peaceful that you could have managed to take
photos of?

MR NZIMA: There was no more peace in Soweto at that time, because
everybody was a victim of the police. Once we take a parent a picture and
they use it in the Press saying that she's looking for her son or
daughter that parent will be harassed and they will be taken to jail
because her or his daughter is a terrorist.

MR MANTHATA: At the World offices what was the thinking of the late Percy
Goboza who sent you to take photos of the students on the march?

MR NZIMA: The thinking of the Press at that time of Percy Goboza was that
we must go ahead, we must not be intimidated whether the police are
shooting or not we must take the pictures and he himself, Goboza was
detained because of that exposure which was using the World newspaper
before it was banned. So that was the strategy of the Press in South
Africa.

MR LEWIN: Just a brief question if I may, in the light of everything else
that happened it might not seem, that important that you mentioned it
very specifically as a reason for the fact that you are no longer a Press
photographer, or even a photographer, were you actually paid SOWETO
HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	16	S NZIMA

by anybody for your picture, possibly the most famous picture to come out
of South Africa in the last 30 years?

MR NZIMA: I was never paid a cent for that picture and that's why I say I
was exploited by the Argus Group. And the picture was used extensively
even abroad. The picture has now been publicised in the history of South
Africa, if you look at the book called Illustrated History of South
Africa, that picture is there. I don't know who is ripping the royalties
of that picture, it must be the Argus Group or who else I don't know.

MR LEWIN: Who has the negatives?

MR NZIMA: The Argus Group have got the negatives but when I go to them
now they told me that the negatives are missing and that the picture has
become the people's picture, they don't have control over the pictures
anymore.

MR LEWIN: Thanks very much. Would you like to become a photographer again?

MR NZIMA: No I don't want to.

MS SOOKA: Thank you.

MS MKHIZE: I have just one question for you which is to say the
Commission partly hopes to be able to assist young people to ask critical
questions about our past. Our Act aims at promoting national
reconciliation and unity, but we don't know what to say exactly to young
people about reconciliation if we do not understand what exactly
happened. Maybe I will ask you to assist us that based on the picture
that made you known worldwide of Hector Petersen and many other minute
details that you came up with around June 16, how can the journalist be
of help to our schools in terms of helping young people in particular to
understand human rights violations?

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	17	S NZIMA

MR NZIMA: I think our student of the 1996 should be in the position that
they should match the change in this country, to follow the political
change and the education shall change to suit the system of today. The
student of 1976 and 1996 should show a difference between those days. The
duty of the Press should be the way of changing the system of education
that as they are doing now I can...(tape ends)

...take this journalism career as a profession. Journalism is a very
important career that some of the students should follow that. Then
focusing at the teaching courses only, but journalism is a very important
thing. I am no longer interested to be a photographer but I've started a
photographic school in my area to teach the young ones to be
photographers and to be journalists. I have already started a darkroom
whereby they can take a black and white picture and teach them how to
process and print the pictures themselves. That is my contribution in the
community where I live now.

MS MKHIZE: I have said I will ask you one question but on the basis of
what you have said I am also tempted to ask you another related question
as to also relating to the role of the Press. Right now we have heard the
testimony from Antoinette Sithole and after she has given her testimony I
was saying to myself how does the family cope with such a traumatic
memory, and then I want to ask you a question as to what do you think
should be the role of journalists in assisting the communities to relive
this June 16th without leaving too many people injured, because we have
these commemorations and young people's names like Hector come to the
fore, but how can that be done in such a way that you promote national
unity and reconciliation?

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	18	A SITHOLE

MR NZIMA: A journalist has got an important role to play in the
community. A journalist can build the country and they can destroy the
country. It is the duty of all the journalists to be committed, to write
something that is going to reconcile the people with the understanding
that this writing they are doing is to build South Africa. Let us forget
about the past. A drop of Hector Petersen's blood bought the freedom for
education in South Africa.

MS SOOKA: Thank you. I would like to thank you Antoinette for sharing
your story with us. It is one of the sad tragedies about South Africa
that this democracy that we cherish so has been brought about by the
blood and the sacrifices of many, many young people such as your brother.
We know that there is a monument to him but I would like to ask is there
anything else that you think that the Commission can do which it can
recommend to government to make sure that young people remember the
sacrifices of people like Hector Petersen?

MS SITHOLE: Yes. My brother like the karate sport, so besides karate
sport now that we no longer have facilities like club houses where we
used to go for dance or traditional dance, whatever it is that kids can
do, that is what I would like to ask to have especially in the community
because all those were burnt down. So I would like them to be rebuilt and
all those things should come back and children should not go to the
streets and hang about the town for drugs and whatever. So in that way so
many - I think now that many people are not working they will contribute
to help children you know by teaching them dance and religious - I think
almost everything that kids can do. So that's really what I would like to
happen.

SOWETO HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	19	S NZIMA

MS SOOKA: Thank you. Sam we thank you for sharing your story with us, and
we thank you also for bringing along the pictures that you have so
generously allowed us to show which we would remind people are set up at
the back of the hall. I think one of the tragedies of South Africa is
that journalists like yourself who are often the only windows between
what has happened in Soweto and the world did not get remunerated
properly for the work that you did. We will not promise, I think in your
instance, to be able to assist you in dealing with it, but we could
possibly try and recommend some legal firm that could assist you with
trying to do something about getting some kind of accreditation for the
picture that you took. Thank you very much for sharing your stories with
us.

MR NZIMA: And in addition to that I am also concerned about the memorial
stone which has been erected at Orlando West High. The picture of Hector
Petersen has been engraved on that stone, but my name is not appearing
anywhere there. I am the architect of the picture.

MS SOOKA: Thank you, thank you very much, you may resume your seat.

	-------------------------

