DATE: 19




DATE: 19.11.96 NAME: B. SKEPU

CASE: EAST LONDON - BISHO MASSACRE II





EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	1	B SKEPU

MR POTGIETER: I will now move on to Bongiwe Gloria Skepu, and hand over
to June Crichton.

BONGIWE GLORIA SKEPU: (sworn in)

MS CRICHTON: Good afternoon Mrs Skepu. You have come to tell us about the
murder of your husband on that day, the 7th of September 1992. He was a
29 year-old man and at the time he was working as a postman and his name
was Zanethemba Skepu, is that correct?

MS SKEPU: Yes it is so.

MS CRICHTON: In your statement you say that you were not there at the
time, can you tell us how you heard about it and what the result of your
hearing about it was?

MS SKEPU: On the 7th of September my husband got up in the morning and
went to the march in Bisho. We stayed together with our little child. Our
child was seven at the time. I looked up to my husband, even the child
looked up to the father. My husband then went to Bisho. At about one
o'clock I listened to the news. I realised from the report that there
were shootings in Bisho. I saw the people that he had gone to Bisho with
coming back and he was not amongst the people. I just assumed that he is
still coming. I slept without seeing him, without hearing any news.

	In the morning of the next day a lady from our area came to me, she
asked me if my husband had come back, I said no he did not come back. I
was starting to feel restless because a lot of time had elapsed. I went
together with a lady and a gentleman from my family, we got onto a taxi
to Grey Hospital. Before we got to the Grey Hospital I realised that the
people I was with were talking about something. I was not sure what it
was they were talking about. The taxi then stopped and I was told to get
off the

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	1	B SKEPU

taxi. There's a lady they were talking to in the taxi. I was told to get
off the taxi because my husband is in Frere Hospital. They told me he was
injured in the leg. I then went home. I had no hope at all. I got home.
My mother-in-law wondered why I had come back and I told her that I was
told to come back home.

	These people came back after a short while. They said they saw
Zanethemba in Frere Hospital, he had been injured in the leg. I realised
that people kept on talking to each other and excluding me. I then went
to one of them and asked exactly what happened, then they still would not
tell me.

	I then was told to go to my mother-in-law. Two men came, if I am not
mistaken, but before they came the ladies from our area came to my home.
It was a very hot day. I was sitting outside. These women came in and sat
in the house. Then two gentlemen came by. They told us that my husband
had passed away in Bisho. That was the last time I heard about him.

MS CRICHTON: Just take your time.

MS SKEPU: It was not my wish to break down because my child told me not
to cry but just to talk. He is now eleven years old.

MS CRICHTON: .... have broken down, we do understand that. I'd like to
move on now. In your statement you say that your husband was buried at a
mass funeral, is that correct?

MS SKEPU: Yes it is so.

MS CRICHTON: And then subsequent to that you approached attorneys, Smith
Tabatha and van Heerden and you asked them for their advice, is that
right?

MS SKEPU: Yes.

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	B SKEPU

MS CRICHTON: What was the outcome of that? (The speaker's mike is not on)
What was the result of that approach to the attorneys?

MS SKEPU: I went to the attorneys in October, I don't remember the dates.
The attorneys said I must bring my ID and my marriage certificate, also
the death certificate. My son's birth certificate as well. I brought all
these documents to the attorneys. I waited. I don't remember whether it
was in May or June but they called me. I went to them. When I got there I
went to Mr Smith. Mr Smith gave me a cheque, it was worth R69 000, that
is the last time I liaised with the attorneys.

MS CRICHTON: Please speak up, some of the Commissioners are not hearing
you.

MS SKEPU: The attorneys in June called me, either in June or May. I went
to them, they gave me a cheque of R69 000, that is the last time I
liaised with the attorneys.

MS CRICHTON: You mention that as a result of the incident it has left you
with depression and as you said earlier on feeling very lonely without
your husband, are you on any kind of treatment for the depression?

MS SKEPU: No I am not under treatment.

MS CRICHTON: Where are you staying at this time?

MS SKEPU: I stay in Mlakalaka, back home.

MS CRICHTON: Your statement said that you didn't have proper
accommodation because you've had to move away from the place you were in
before when you were being supported by your husband, is that correct?

MS SKEPU: Yes it is so.

MS CRICHTON: And you say that you have a request to the Commission what
is that?

EAST LONDON HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	B SKEPU

MS SKEPU: My request is that my child be educated.

MS CRICHTON: You just have the one child?

MS SKEPU: Yes I have one child.

MS CRICHTON: What standard is your child in now?

MS SKEPU: He is in standard three.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you Mrs Skepu. I am going to hand you back to the
Chairperson now.

MR POTGIETER: Thank you June. Thank you Mrs Skepu.

	------------------









