
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	22-07-1996	NAME: DESMOND SKEPE

CASE: QUEENSTOWN

DAY 1



REVD XUNDU:	Mr Skepe I am going to swear you in now. You will please
stand.

DESMOND SKEPE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you very much.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Skepe, we welcome you and we ask Mr Xundu to lead you and
ask questions in the name of the Commission, thank you.

REVD XUNDU:	I would like you to relax. What is your clan name?

D SKEPE:	Mbexe.

REVD XUNDU:	I would like you to relax so that you tell us everything in
full, so that this Commission should hear everything and then you can ask
questions thereafter.

	You have come here to give witness on your friend, Vusumzi, who was
killed by the police. Are you related to him?

D SKEPE:	Vusumzi, I am not related to him, but he is a child who came
from outside Nxala from the September family. He had a problem there at
home. He then came at a very difficult time here in Quamani during the
time of Sections 10.

	People who are not local here, was sent out. He had come here in seek of
a job. He came here, arrived here in 1981. He had been here for quite
some time according to what he told me, in search of a job.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			D SKEPE

	He then asked for me to assist him. Listening to his difficulty I then
decided to be of help to him, I then took him and wrote his name down and
have him registered as a resident of Quamani and changed his name to
Skepe and regarded him as a relative.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you, because now it reconciles with the information we
have now. Where did he work, Vusumzi, where did he work?

D SKEPE:	He then worked at KSM where they, it is a milling company and
when working there, he then got a living place at R81, here in the
location and he thereafter got married.

	This was, he lived in a room because there in R, it was a Coloured
residential area and then the Municipality intended to remove the
Coloureds to Allovale, so whenever a house was vacated and there would be
someone renting there, then that house would be given to the person who
had been renting.

	Then that's where problems started. Then I did not know that even at
work, that he was also having some problems with the Unions.

REVD XUNDU:	There at work was he a member of a Union? What Union was that?

D SKEPE:	I really don't know, it was F something, FAWU, I think.

REVD XUNDU:	As a member of the community was he a member of any
organisation?

D SKEPE:	Yes, he was.

REVD XUNDU:	Tell us now more about the day in September when the police
came to where he lived. Who were the police?

D SKEPE:	If I can remember well I can say it was between

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			D SKEPE

August and September in 1983 when the police, when Mr Vukutu fetched him
from work and the brought him home.

	His wife had just delivered a baby at that time, they then went into the
house from the back side and that is where he was shot dead, in front of
the wife and the child.

REVD XUNDU:	What was their aim?

D SKEPE:	The police had come to evict him, so that he could get another
dwelling place, because they wanted to give this house to someone else.

REVD XUNDU:	Did they have any eviction order?

D SKEPE:	No, they did not have any according to my knowledge.

REVD XUNDU:	Now, Vukutu and Yokwe, are they still here?

D SKEPE:	Mr Vukutu is still a policeman here in Queenstown.

REVD XUNDU:	Now, tell us in your story you say when he refused to move,
they then hit him dead.

D SKEPE:	Then when he did not want to come out of the house, they
actually shot him and the person who did that, is Mr Vukutu and then Mr
Yokwe took an axe and pushed it into his hand pretending as if he wanted
to axe Mr Yokwe. But according to what I know, there was no reason why
they had to push that axe into his hand, because if he had wanted to
defend himself, he could have done that at the time they had gone to
fetch him from work..

REVD XUNDU:	Is Mr Yokwe still alive?

D SKEPE:	Yes, he is still alive, but he is a pensioner.

REVD XUNDU:	Was there any charge laid against this two murderers?

D SKEPE:	No, there never was. In stead I went with my neighbours together
with his wife to lay a charge at the charge office. A Captain present at
that time told us that

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			D SKEPE

there was still an investigation. Then nothing happened.

	Months thereafter we then went to East London to see a Lawyer by the
name of Siwisa to lay a charge and to ask him to pursue the matter, but
nothing happened.

REVD XUNDU:	Was there no post mortem or inquest?

D SKEPE:	No, nothing.

REVD XUNDU:	Is there any reparation that you got, the wife got?

D SKEPE:	No, I've been trying to find out, but I haven't got anything.
All I know Vusumzi's family is in Manzimdaxa in Txala, but I don't know
the home.

REVD XUNDU:	So you never saw the wife - she escaped from that time?

D SKEPE:	Yes, she did.

REVD XUNDU:	Now what do you want this Commission to do about this story?

D SKEPE:	I am worried and this hurts me that what happened to the baby of
Vusumzi? How is he surviving as a child? I want him to get educated.

REVD XUNDU:	What about Yokwe and Vukutu? Don't you think they could at
least tell us what happened?

D SKEPE:	I have a request that there should be an inquiry about these two
people, Vukutu and Yokwe.

REVD XUNDU:	I then take you back to the Commissioner.

REVD FINCA:	We thank you Mr Xundu. Dr Ramashala?

DR RAMASHALA:	Chairperson, all I want to do is to find out where that 13
year old son is? Mr Skepe, where is that 13 year old son?

D SKEPE:	I think he is with the grandmother.

DR RAMASHALA:	Grandmother? You can answer in Xhoza, okay. I just want to
know a little bit about the son and to find

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			D SKEPE

out his grade level. Do you have any idea?

D SKEPE:	I haven't been able to find out anything, I was still looking
for the wife. I don't know how the child is.

DR RAMASHALA:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Adv Denzil Potgieter.

ADV POTGIETER:	Thank you Chairperson. Mr Skepe what is the name of the
wife?

D SKEPE:	Her name is Zoleka.

ADV POTGIETER:	And then one other thing, you have referred to Section 10.
You've said that those were the difficult times of Section 10. The
Section 10 that you refer to, is that the Section of the Pass Laws, the
old Pass Laws?

D SKEPE:	That is so. It was so that when a person was not allowed to be
here in town, they would use Section 10 to get you away from here.

ADV POTGIETER:	Thank you very much.

ADV FINCA:		Mr Skepe, Mr Vukutu and Constable Yokwe, were they employed
as policemen here in Queenstown?

D SKEPE:	They were employed as Municipality police here in Queenstown.

REVD FINCA:	After they did all this, the Municipality as the employer did
he take any steps to show that they - these people were not sent by him
or he was not responsible?

D SKEPE;	No, it was as if a dog had been killed, because nothing actually
happened.

REVD FINCA:	No 7 on your statement, you have indicated that you went to
the police station in Queenstown to lay a charge, but this was
disregarded?

D SKEPE:	Yes, it is like that.

REVD FINCA:	Do you remember the month and the year on which you laid this
charge or the person who attended you at

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			D SKEPE

the police station, who did not accept this?

D SKEPE:	When we arrived at the charge office on the very day of the
death of Vusumzi, after the corps had been removed, we went in then we
were referred to Captain, but I can't remember the name of the Captain.

	We then went to him and he said there was still an investigation on this
matter.

REVD FINCA:	Was that the last you heard, last thing you heard? Nothing
else was done, he did not come back to you?

D SKEPE:	No, the Captain did not come back to me and then we decided to
get the lawyer's assistance, Mr Siwisa.

REVD FINCA:	On number 8 in your statement, you have made mention that
Zolila Skepe was evicted out of the house. Who is now living in the house?

D SKEPE:	It is another man called Sekole, who is a businessman owning a
shop.

REVD FINCA:	Would you be able now to furnish us with the surname later?

D SKEPE:	Yes, if I could remember I will.

REVD FINCA:	Are there any other questions. Ntsikelelo Sandi?

MR SANDI:	The one living in that house, you said his name is Skole.

D SKEPE:	It is Sekole, that is how I know him.

MR SANDI:	Are there other people who lived in that house before or was he
the one who occupied the house immediately after the eviction of the dead
person?

D SKEPE:	No, it was Sekole, who occupied it immediately.

MR SANDI:	Now you say Constable Vukutu is still working for the South
African Defence, SAP?

D SKEPE:	Yes, it is like that.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7

REVD FINCA:	We thank you Mr Skepe for your report and I think this is an
indication that those who were in office abused their powers to that
extend.

	This leaves us with a question as to those people who abused their
powers, do they need to be placed in responsible positions once more and
what guarantee is there that they will not again abuse their powers.

	This is a great question that we are asking as a Commission. And even
those testimonies presented to us, they also have left us with this
question, because this people have not been using their powers carefully.

	This makes us to think deeply about the abuse of power. We shall now
therefor, ask that you should give us more details about the person who
is now presently occupying the house. Get us the surname so that we can
make a follow up of this matter in the correct way. We therefor thank you
for your bravery, we thank you for your tolerance up to this point.

	We therefore ask that you should continue doing so.

	--------------------

