
	1	E SOLOMON

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: EVELYN HOMBAKAZI SOLOMON

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Let's now call upon Evelyn Hombakazi Solomon, whose other
surname is Zito.

EVELYN HOMBAKAZI SOLOMON: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: I greet you Ms Solomon. Thank you for your patience and
tolerance but, you knew that your turn would ultimately come. In your
statement you have referred to the fact that your husband, Nicholas
Pakamile Solomon was one of the people who were shot dead on this day in
question, is that correct?

MS SOLOMON: Yes, it is like that.

CHAIRPERSON: By the way, at the time he was shot dead, what work was he
doing?

MS SOLOMON: He was working, but at the time he was shot dead he was on
his way to the funeral.

CHAIRPERSON: In your statement, you mentioned that he left five children
with you.

MS SOLOMON: Yes, it is like that.

CHAIRPERSON: Where are these children now?

MS SOLOMON: They are there.

CHAIRPERSON: And what are they doing?

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	E SOLOMON

MS SOLOMON: They are doing nothing. They went to school up till Std.10.

CHAIRPERSON: Are they still at school?

MS SOLOMON: Only two are still at school, otherwise the older ones are
working.

CHAIRPERSON: Could you now explain how this incident of the death of your
husband affected your family?

MS SOLOMON: We suffered and we were hurt. When their father was going to
a funeral, two of my children stayed behind, though they had intentions
to follow. After some time, I heard some gun shots and I was with the
youngest children and I didn't know what was happening. After some time I
heard some gun shots and I stood and went outside. I could see people
were going round towards the danger light. We ran after them and I saw
two of my children crying and they were saying there was shooting and
they didn't know where there father was. So we went towards the Mitta
store but we couldn't proceed. We met some of the people who were injured
coming back and we asked each other, where were the others, what had
happened and we went back home and we were dissatisfied and I didn't know
where my husband was.

CHAIRPERSON: Without disturbing you, I noticed that here in your
statement you have mentioned that amongst your requests and wishes you
wish that you should get some assistance so that your children could
further their education so as to survive in life. Could you expantiate on
this matter?

MS SOLOMON: Yes, that is my wish, Sir. If their father was still alive,
these children would have been successful and I would be enjoying a
better life and I would be having

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	E SOLOMON

some interest and I would be having a beautiful house.

CHAIRPERSON: Is that all you have to say?

MS SOLOMON: I wish this Commission to do something for me, that I should
be also successful like my children, in as far as life is concerned and
in as far as my children getting better education because I cannot work,
I am suffering from arthritis.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank you Mr Solomon. Is there any other thing you would
like to say?

MS SOLOMON: No, I will stop there.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

------------------------

