
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	08 APRIL 1997	

NAME: 	TOPSY NOVAKELE TEMBANI

CASE:		EC1058/96			-	GRAHAMSTOWN

DAY 2

____________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Topsy Novakele Tembani.

TOPSY NOVAKELE TEMBANI: (Duly sworn in, states).

REV XUNDU: Thank you very much. You may be seated.

CHAIRPERSON: Over to you, June Crichton.

MS CRICHTON: Good afternoon Mrs Tembani, can you hear me?

MRS TEMBANI: I can hear you.

MS CRICHTON: We are going to talk, this afternoon, about Hermans "Pele"
Zonwabele and he is your grandchild. Is that correct?

MRS TEMBANI: That is correct.

MS CRICHTON: I also have on my programme here two other names, Fetze
Nomarwayi and Mzimkulu Mkele. Were you going to speak about them as well?

MRS TEMBANI: No, but if you, if you, if any questions were put to about
them I would have been able to say.

MS CRICHTON: Mrs Tembani, we do not have any information about them on
the statement so we will not be speaking about them then. Thank you.
Right, now we can start then. As I said previously, you are grandmother
to Hermans "Pele" and you are here to tell us about his death in 1986. He
was a member of the Alexandria Youth Congress. What age was at that time?

MRS TEMBANI: I have forgotten. His documents are at home.

MS CRICHTON: Was he at school?

MRS TEMBANI: No, he had stopped school, he was a young man. MS CRICHTON:
Can you tell us what happened on that day when he died, in your words?

MRS TEMBANI: There was shooting in the township area. I was inside the
house while the shooting was taking place and it was difficult for me to
come out of the house because I was in the house alone. After a while I
went to peep out of the window and I saw an ambulance pass the house. By
this time all was quiet and I heard the following day when I was told by
a young guy by the name of Joey, when I asked him if he had not seen
"Pele" the previous day. He told me that "Pele" was on ice and I was
shocked.

CHAIRPERSON: Is it possible for you to speak a bit louder, please, we
cannot hear you very well.

MRS TEMBANI: There was shooting that evening and I was afraid to come out
of the house because I was alone at home. After a while I saw an
ambulance pass and I sat and waited until the morning, but I waited in
vain. The following day a guy by the name of Joey came and I asked him
where "Pele" was and he said to me "Pele" is on ice, he was shot dead by
these defence force police last night.

MS CRICHTON: Mrs Tembani, can you tell me who this Joey was? Was he a
friend of "Pele's"?

MRS TEMBANI: Yes, he was a friend. He was "Pele's" uncles son, a cousin.

MS CRICHTON: Alright, will you continue and tell us what happened at the
post mortem.

MS CRICHTON: They were all walking together and then they parted ways
when they encountered the police. These police grabbed Joey and said that
he should stay there and they followed "Pele". When they got to the
corner they found "Pele" and shot him.

MS CRICHTON: Did Joey tell you who it was who had shot your grandson?

MRS TEMBANI: Yes, he did. He said it was Mbuta.

MS CRICHTON: Is that the only name that he gave to you?

MRS TEMBANI: No, it was Mbutana. I wrote all these names down, but,
because I was worried that I would forget them. MS CRICHTON: Alright,
take your time. We will wait for you. Mrs Tembani, may I read these names
out that you have written down?

MRS TEMBANI: Yes, you may go ahead.

MS CRICHTON: You have written here Mbutana Thembikos, Mzwandile Mthathi,
Melekile Ncipa and ...

MRS TEMBANI: It is Ncipa.

MS CRICHTON: Ncipa?

MRS TEMBANI: Yes, it is Ncipa.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you. You are saying then that there was no court case?

MRS TEMBANI: There was a court case, but nothing came of it.

MS CRICHTON: Did you have an attorney?

MRS TEMBANI: No, there was no legal representative. I do not think there
was one. No, there was not one.

MS CRICHTON: Was there any problem at the funeral?

MRS TEMBANI: We buried them ourselves. There was no problem, we buried
them.

MS CRICHTON: Mrs Tembani, you have been caring for or had been caring for
this young man. Where were his parents?

MRS TEMBANI: They were there, but they were unemployed. They are no
longer there. He has no father, his mother cared for him.

MS CRICHTON: And his mother, where is she now?

MRS TEMBANI: She has since gone to look for work. She does not work there.

MS CRICHTON: Mrs Tembani, the last question for you now. You have come to
the Commission, you have made the statement to the Commission, what were
you expecting the Commission to do for you?

MRS TEMBANI: This Commission can help me in various ways, because he use
to help me in lots of ways. The two of us lived there together, there
were two small children. So the Commission can help me, because even my
yard needs attention.

MS CRICHTON: Mrs Tembani, is there anything other than that that you wish
to say to us?

MRS TEMBANI: I need help, that I be helped in some way.

MS CRICHTON: Are you not well, Mrs Tembani?

MRS TEMBANI: I have chest ailments. I suffer respiratory problems from
time to time.

MS CRICHTON: Is your testimony, therefore, complete now?

MRS TEMBANI: Yes.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you Mrs Tembani. I will hand you back to the
Chairperson now.

CHAIRPERSON: Mrs Tembani, in your statement you say you do not think that
after he, this child died there was an inquest held. Was there one held
or not? Was anyone charged with the death of this child or not?

MRS TEMBANI: No.

CHAIRPERSON: Did you receive any compensation for his death?

MRS TEMBANI: No, we did not receive anything.

CHAIRPERSON: Secondly, while you were giving your testimony before this
Commission, even though you did not mention it in your statement, you say
that you did not have a legal representative.

MRS TEMBANI: No.

CHAIRPERSON: Why did you not have a legal representative?

MRS TEMBANI: I was very confused because when I enquired about this I did
not understand what was happening.

CHAIRPERSON: The organisation of which this child was a member, did it
not advise you as to what you could do, what your rights were since this
child was killed in this fashion?

MRS TEMBANI: No, I did not go.

CHAIRPERSON: Didn't anything happen?

MRS TEMBANI: No.

CHAIRPERSON: Are you the head of the home?

MRS TEMBANI: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Is your husband still alive?

MRS TEMBANI: No, he is deceased. It was just this child and I and I am
responsible for the home now.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much, Mama, this is a very moving story and
we have the deepest sympathy for you, because a lot of people your age do
not understand the finer details of these processes as, and do not
understand why your children had to die like animals and nothing was done
to the perpetrators. We trust that we, as a Commission, because we are
here because of that, will try, by all means, to follow up on this matter
and if there is anything which we can do, we will endeavour to do it and
if we cannot, we will have tried. We know that elderly people, like
yourself, will not know the intricacies of these problems, of these
processes especially since you are the head of the house, you no longer
have a husband. We extend our deepest sympathy towards you. Thank you
very much.

	------------------------------

