
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23-09-1996		NAME: 	NOMBULELO THOLE

								NONGOKU ZWELIFILE

CASE: DUNCAN VILLAGE

DAY 1



REVD FINCA:	We would call Nombelelo Elizabeth Thole and Nongoku
Zwelifile. Will you please come forward.

REVD XUNDU:	I would like them to take an oath. Nombulelo, will you please
stand up.

NOMBULELO ELIZABETH THOLE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Nongoku?

NONGOKU ZWELIFILE:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. Thank you Mr Chairman.

REVD FINCA:	 We welcome you to this Commission. I would like you to put
the microphones in your heads because Ms Crichton is going to ask you
questions. She will ask you questions in English and you will get
interpretation in Xhoza. Thank you, over to you June.

MS CRICHTON:	Good afternoon Ms Thole, good afternoon. You can hear me?
Can you hear me? I am conscious that I do not want to interrupt.

	Let's try again now, can you hear me now? I am conscious that there is
an audience here who needs to hear what you say, so I am going to ask you
very few questions and let you tell your story. I may need to interrupt
you

to clarify a point, though.

	After the funeral on the 13th of August, two days after it in fact, your
brother was shot and killed, by the South African Defence Force soldiers.
Would you tell us as much

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			NE THOLE

as you know what happened?

MS THOLE:	Yes, I will tell you. Yes, I can explain. My brother Zandisile
Thole was shot on the Monday, in the morning and men had been asked to go
outside and he was sleeping. People came in our house and they said all
men must go outside and my brother went outside.

	There is a street called Bomele Niomzamo, we found him ...

REVD FINCA:	Sorry I want to interrupt you. There are people listening in
the house, there are people listening on their radios around South
Africa. They are listening because they want to hear your story. Please
when you are talking, be clear so that people can hear you, thank you.

NE THOLE:	It was on Monday when Zandisile was shot. People came at home
in the morning, they said that all men must go outside, and he was
sleeping at that time.

	And they came to my house and they told us that all men must go outside
and he also went outside. When they were around the Bemene Street near
Mzamo, someone came at my house and told us that Zandisile was shot on
the corner and we went there and we saw that he was shot at the head and
in his leg.

	We didn't find any car so that we can take him to the hospital, some
boys helped us to take him, to try to take him to the hospital. When we
approached Gonstown, we saw a car coming because there were no cars near
Duncan Village and then we went through the Coloured area in Buffalo
Flats, we went to the hospital and the hospital was so full, we waited
for a long time.

	And they came and took him to the wards, we left him there. We went back
home with the car. On Tuesday we went

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			NE THOLE

to the hospital to look for him, it was so difficult for us, we also went
through the Coloured area.

	In hospital they told us to wait, and we waited. While we were still
waiting, two nurses came to us - they told us that he died yesterday, he
didn't survive. That is when we knew that he was dead.

MS CRICHTON:	Can you tell me about the funeral, were there any incidents
at the funeral?

INTERPRETER:	Can the Speaker please come closer a little bit to the mike?

NE THOLE:	On the funeral day he was buried, but whilst we were still
there, people said that the soldiers were near the holes in the stadium.
We waited there for a long time before we can go to bury him.

MS CRICHTON:	In your statement you say that you want assistance with your
deceased brother's child who is schooling. How old is this child?

NE THOLE:	He is 12 years old, he is 12 years old.

MS CRICHTON:	Is he at school still? Is he at school?

NE THOLE:	Yes, he is at school, he is in standard 4.

MS CRICHTON:	Were there any civil claims made, did you visit an attorney
at all?

NE THOLE:	No, we didn't go to any attorneys because we didn't have money,
he was the only breadwinner at home.

MS CRICHTON:	Is there any other request that you have that you want to
put to the Commission?

NE THOLE:	My request is about his child. I want his child to be educated.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you very much, Ms Thole, I am going to hand you back
to our Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you June. Are there any questions?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			N ZWELIFILE			

Thank you. Are there any questions? Okay, take the next person.

MS CRICHTON:	Nongoku Zwelifile, take the stand please. Can you hear me Ms
Zwelifile? Are you comfy now and can you hear me?

MS ZWELIFILE:	Yes, I can hear you.

MS CRICHTON:	You are here today to tell us about your brother, Bonakele
Bongani Zwelifile, is that correct, who was shot?

MS ZWELIFILE:	Yes, that's correct.

MS CRICHTON:	Shot on the 11th of August by the South African Defence
Force, is that correct?

MS ZWELIFILE:	Yes, he was shot by the soldiers.

MS CRICHTON:	Will you tell us what happened as you understand it?

MS ZWELIFILE:	What happened on that Tuesday of August, there were men who
came to my house and they, when they arrived at home, they said that they
want all men to be outside. They didn't respond to that and this people
waited outside and they said that they want all men to go outside.

	And my mother said to the children they must go outside, I am the oldest
and my brothers are younger than me. I said to my mother, they are
younger, they should not go outside and I said to my mother she doesn't
know who wants them and why they are wanted and then he woke them up and
said they must go outside and they went outside.

	They left us there at home, they were shot and my older brother came
back home and he didn't, he wasn't shot. The other one - he was shot in
his heart where there was an ID book in his pocket. My mother said that
that looked like my son and it was him.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			N ZWELIFILE

	He was taken there and he was dead at that time, people were not aware
that he was dead.

	They wanted to take him to hospital, but they couldn't. When the car
arrived the owner of the car got injured. He was shot, but fortunately
... (tape ends) My older brother was fainting because he was so shocked
at home. My mother was so afraid, he was so scared.

	He asked me to go to Cambridge because they were so afraid, they were
not strong, they were weak. They wanted me to go there to take my brother
to the mortuary. They asked me what happened, and then I said that people
arrived at my home and I don't know who they are. I didn't see them.

	We waited for the funeral day, praying and soldiers used to come while
we were still praying and the comrades used to come to my house to pray
and the soldiers used to go there every time.

	We were so scared, even when the comrades were praying for us, we were
so afraid.

MS CRICHTON:	Ms Zwelifile, I'm going to stop you at that point and I want
to ask you a question. You say that after he was certified dead and a
year later, you were told to go to court. Will you tell us about what
happened at court please?

MS ZWELIFILE:	I received a letter from court and then I asked my brother
to accompany me there. We went to the court, I didn't go to the
courtroom, I just went to another room, to the private room. And I was
asked a question of whether my brother hit the police with stones and
then I said I didn't know that, because my brother was not alone. And he
didn't throw stones to the police.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			N ZWELIFILE

MS CRICHTON:	Can you tell me how they tried to persuade you. You said
they tried to persuade you, what did they do?

MS ZWELIFILE:	I just asked them whether that's the only question they
wanted to ask me and then they said that's all. And I left the letter
there, they didn't ask me any other questions. I asked my brother who was
that police and then he said the one is Nqawe and my brother didn't know
who others were.

MS CRICHTON:	Did you have any further harassment from the police after
that?

MS ZWELIFILE:	No, but they stopped me while I was coming from my work,
from my job - we're not employed at home. They stopped me and they wanted
to beat me, they wanted me to return the food of which my boss gave me,
because they said we didn't like whites, so I should return back the food.

MS CRICHTON:	In your statement you have asked that you wanted some form
of reparation for the son who is the son of Bonakele, is that correct?

MS ZWELIFILE:	Yes, that's correct.

MS CRICHTON:	Would you like to tell me what you mean by some form of
reparation, what do you mean exactly? Do you want help with education?

MS ZWELIFILE:	My request is that I want his mother to be helped, because
their father died when they were still young. My mother brought them here
in East London and I was working for them. He is old now and I want him
to be educated.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you very much Mr Zwelifile, I hand you back to the
Chairman.

REVD FINCA:	Nombulelo and Ms Zwelifile, Nongoku

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7

Zwelifile, I was referring to that lady next to you - we would like to
thank you for coming here.

	For bringing the evidence in front of this Commission about the death of
your brothers. Your brothers died in the struggle between the South
African Defence Force and the people of Duncan Village.

	As we are listening to the stories, it becomes clear to us that the
situation you are presenting to us, is a struggle. It was a war which
required people to loose their lives to compensate. Your brothers, both
of them, Bonakele and Zandisile, they fought and they died in this war.

	We would like to thank you on behalf of the Commission for coming in
front of the Commission and we guarantee that the Commission will look
upon your requests and even if the President has done something or even
if he hasn't done anything, but you have to know that your brothers are
amongst those who fought for this country.

	They fought for the freedom of this country. We would like to thank you
very much and we would like you to take your seats now, thank you.

	--------------------

