	1	MR THWANE


	1	MR THWANE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 08.07.96	NAME: SAM THWANE

CASE: MMABATHO

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

......	We had to put back our plans until February. On the 9th of
February the Executive gathered at the headquarters of the Party, called
Eagle's Nest, situated in the town of Mafikeng. Then we said today is the
day, no mistake. We are going to explode.

	We dispersed in the evening. Rokie and the Secretary General of the
Party remained at the Headquarters. Apparently the spent the night there.

	I went back to my family. My family had already joined me from
Johannesburg. My wife was employed and she is still employed. I went back
to bed, pretending, not telling my wife anything. I did not want to make
a mistake. Not that I did not trust her, but I told myself I've got to be
honest to myself, I've got to be honest with the people I'm working with.
We had agreed that this thing must be kept as secretly as possible.

	I couldn't sleep that night, on the 9th of February. I think I went out
about five times that night. I was waiting for the early hours of the
morning when things were to happen.

	Round about 5 o'clock on the 10th of February I woke my wife and told
her it was time to prepare for work and I just lied and I asked her to
open the radio. She did exactly that.

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	2	S THWANE

	At six o'clock exactly she called me and said, Sam, there is a coup.
Mangope's government has been toppled. And the announcement is, your
party is to be given the government. And I jumped up as if I was not
aware that was going to happen.

	She said to me before she left, you have heard the news, nobody is to go
near the government buildings, except school children, teachers. Well
obviously the police and the soldiers were going to be up and about.

	So at eight in the morning I went down to the travel offices. I
pretended to move around the village to see the reaction of the people.
Everybody was happy. Even some of the police and the soldiers and the
security police I met rejoiced and everybody who could recognise me as
one of the candidates said to me, accommodate me in your new government,
or find me a better post. I know you are going to get a cabinet post. You
were a prominent figure. I kept on smiling. That was on the 10th.

	In the afternoon I went to a bottle store. I wanted to cool off, picked
up a few tins of malt, went back home, took a sip. I wife was excited
about the whole thing.

As I have said that the thing had failed. The South African Police, the
South African soldiers had to restore Mangope to power. Rejoice turned
into mourning and trouble had started for all the members of the PPP
organization.

	People started running out of the country. I said I am not going to run
away. My parents advised me to leave for Botswana. All the relatives
suggested, why don't we leave for Botswana. I am still having relatives
in Botswana, but I said to myself, we started this thing.



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	3	S THWANE

Roke has run away. People are going to remain suffering. Let me be man
enough to stay and face the rest of the hand of Mangope. I stayed. I just
decided to stay and wait for whatever, for fate to take its course.

	It actually did, on the 12th in the afternoon I was picked up by the
Security Police. After running around for two days looking for me. I was
just evading them. I could locate them. I could see them from afar and
seeing their cars just next to a tree or a house. They would go passed.
And I would follow them, knowing that they won't turn back. I preferred
to spend the day with people, fearing for my life. I told myself, if they
pick me up being alone, they could possibly kill me. Which would have
happened. Even the day I was arrested I was picked up in town. I
preferred to be amongst the people for my own good. That was the strategy
I used.

	We spent the night at Mafikeng Prison. That evening it was raining. We
spent the night in an open cell. The cell was congested. You could hardly
sit down. We spend the night standing on our feet. I was not alone.
Apparently some of the members were already detained before me.

	On the Saturday we were driven to Rooigrond. I found a lot of soldiers
there who were detained, most of the members of my party. We were put in
an open cell. Most of us spend almost ten days there.

	Until the end of the ten days, on the 19th of February I was removed
from that cell, taken to an office by two white officers who questioned
me about what happened. I pretended to be honest, not to know anything,
about what happened, why was there a coup.



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	4	S THWANE

	They said to me, you are going to tell us. You better strip. "Trek uit
jong, daar is nie tyd nie". I could smell blood, before it started
flowing. I removed my clothes. I was with only two officers. Apparently
they could not introduce themselves, but I realised they were the
security police. They started interrogating me.

	They did everything at their disposal to get information. Ultimately
they used electric shocks, electric shocks they put on my private parts -
theoretically for most of the day. When I screamed, they would leave the
office and go out.

	They would come back after a few minutes and asked me, gaan jy die
waarheid praat? I would say, yes. They would remove the electric shock
and said, ja jong, praat. Then I said I know nothing. He said, jy het tyd
om te speel man.

	People it was hard. One had to be manly, until they are tired. Then I
was taken back to the cell.

	I stayed or I remained there in detention until the 24th of February.
Then I was released. Not myself only, most of us were released. A handful
remained.

	I went back home. My family started rejoicing. 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th -
round about 5 o'clock, I was with a few friends at our joint where we
used to meet. I was about to relate my order. Somebody said, there comes
a police car. I stopped at the place. An officer I knew very well by the
name of Petri, came out of that car, followed by four heavily police,
with big guns.

	He came straight to me and said, we have come to fetch you. He said, we
don't have time, let's go. I got inside, driven back to Mafikeng Police
Station, trying to reason.



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	5	S THWANE

At the Police Station I was told, we are taking you back to Rooigrond. It
has been a mistake that you were released. You are the man who know
exactly what happened.

	I started becoming suspicious of my colleagues I left behind. That
probably somebody leaked out information that I had knowledge. I became
very restless. That was on a Saturday.

	Sunday morning at about 9 o'clock I was called out of the cell where I
was. Found at the door, Captain Mojana and Captain Molale with nine other
security police. They said, come. Taken to an office. Interrogation
started again.

	This time Captain Mojana and Captain Molale withdrew into another
office. They left me with that group of young men. I could see they were
all still very rough. They looked hefty. You know, something surprised me
during the interrogation, nine as they were, they would all ask questions
at the same time. And I was expected to respond to every question.

	Whilst I was trying to reason, they kick, clap, you know. I would find
myself rolling on the floor. I did not know what was happening, but I
kept on saying that I did not know anything. My biggest problem was not
to sell out information, which would result in many people suffering. I
felt if somebody was to die than I had to stand and wait for death, as
long as people would remain safe.

	And I said I am not going to give information. I was taken back to my
cell late in the afternoon. That meant a day without food.

	Monday I was told, I was taken to the headquarters of



MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	6	S THWANE

the security police. A place named Kopie, along the Ramathlabama Road,
Mafikeng Ramathlabama. That is where the headquarters of the security
police is situated, next to the defence force camp.

	I could smell blood. I have heard about the place. It is an isolated
place. It is in the forest. I started panicking. Immediately I was put on
that van that morning, I said to myself, am I going to be the second
Steve Biko. Steve Biko was removed from Port Elizabeth en route to
Pretoria. I was removed from Rooigrond and being taken into the
wilderness. This is the end of my life today.

	On arrival there, I was taken to an office. A security officer, I'm
trying to remember his name - I'll remember it a I go on - I was put in
an office. He came to me, he asked me, I know you even know me. He asked,
why did you do what you did? I said what? Why are you involved in what
happened? I said, no I know nothing. He said, for your own good, tell me
the truth. I have all the truth, I know what happened, I know what you
did, but it is up to you, for your own good you will have to tell me.	At
any rate, that you don't want to talk, I'm leaving you here. Some people
will attend to you.

	I knew he meant white people. He meant white officers which ultimately
walked into the office, looked at me. You know how a policeman can look
at you, he doesn't wink his eyes - you wink your eyes many times, but he
won't wink his. He is drawing something from you. He is creating fear in
your face. When you look at him you start panicking.

	One of them said to me:

		"Jong, hierso ons is baie besig. Ons het nie tyd vir mense soos jy nie,
wat nie die waarheid wil

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	7	S THWANE

		praat nie. Ek gaan tee drink en as ek terugkom gaan ons sit en gesels
en jy gaan my alles s  wat jy weet."

	He left, one remained and said to me, "het jy geld?". I said, no I don't
have money. He said,

		"Rokie se kop is R50 000 jong. As jy net kan s  waar Rokie, jy kry daai
geld en jy gaan huis toe. Ek s , ek is dan in die tronk, hoe kan ek weet
waar gaan die man, ek is in die tronk. Hy s , reg, ek loop ook soos my
maat".

He left me there.

	After a few minutes, they both came back. And then the interrogation
started. Cheeking, clapping, everything you know. Picking up chairs,
hitting me with those chairs, I remember one chair broke the way those
men used their force. I was seated as I am seated, I had to fall back. I
fell back, seated on the chair.

	He picked me up and went for the electric shock. Started their job, as
usually on my private parts.

	In the evening I was driven back to Rooigrond. Then on that day I was
put in isolation. Taken to a cell where I stayed alone for a period of
almost two months. I had nobody to talk to. Five days a week in the
morning, round about seven I would be taken out of the cell, made to run
around for about fifteen minutes, then put back in the cell, locked up
for the day. The cell had a toilet, a washing basin, which means I had
not to say I am going to relieve myself. Food were brought into my cell.

	Occasionally I would be taken to Koppie for further interrogation,
always by white officers. Once a month I would be seen by a doctor. Once
a month I would be seen by MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	8	S THWANE

a magistrate, to check as to whether I was not being

assaulted.

	In the cells I was never assaulted. I don't know whether they feared I
would tell the magistrate. I was not the only one in isolation. I think
we were about twelve but each in his own cell. I was first put in cell No
1. On the arrival of Tim Motiri I was removed to 11. Apparently he was
target number one, as far as I am concerned.

	At one time when the doctor visited me he told me I had high blood
pressure. I was suffering from gout I did not know it was gout, but
according to the doctor it was gout, and I was given Panodo's to relieve
the pain. That is all the kind of treatment I got.

	During my stay at one stage, I was told and given a paper to sign - sort
of a form - that I was to be further detained for 90 days, or until I
talked, what happened to Mangope and why had that to happen.

	Just out of the blue on the 9th of May 1988, in the evening, I got a
shock when they knocked on my door, round about nine o'clock. I thought,
now they are going to finish me. I was told to dress up, take up all my
belongings, walk out of that cell, out of jail, driven to Mafikeng
Prison, then told I was a free man, taken home.

	That is the story, but to add to what I have said - around 1980 during
May, I lost a younger brother who was resident at Ishuseng. When I was
busy making arrangements for the funeral of the young man on a Friday
afternoon, after collecting the corpse from the mortuary, a combi full of
people pulled up at my place, followed by a small car. They came to me
parents place, where the funeral was to take place. I could see through
the window that those

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	9	S THWANE

were security police. They asked somebody outside if I was in.

	On learning I was inside the house they said I should be called out. I
was called outside and told I was to be picked up. They were security
police. I said to them, let me inform my parents. I was allowed to go
back into the house. I informed my parents. My father tried to reason
with them as well as my elder brother but they just had no time

	I was driven back. Then there was the parliament, and behind that
parliament - it was a wall like this but it was called parliament. There
were cells there. I was put in a cell. At about nine o'clock in the
evening, somebody by the name of Sotsobe, who introduced himself as the
Chief of the Intelligence, with a group of five men, opened the cell,
drove me to my place.

	They did not ask where I stayed, they went straight to my place. I was
surprised. How did these people know where I stayed? I meant to me I was
all along under surveillance. I was being followed, all my movements. At
any rate I knew I was being monitored.

	After they searched my house I was asked about books I had in the house.
I showed them my bookcase. Sotsobe with his men took a set of 14 books,
very valuable books. I valued those books very much. Gave me a list, they
took 14 books. Some of the books I remember, Sharafoot, The End, Revonia
Trial, Not for your Comfort, Robben Island, Nelson Mandela, Facing Mount
Kenia, Koruma, you count them, there were 14. Up to this day I value
those books a lot. Up to this day. Thank you.

MS SEROKE: Thank you very much, Mr Thwane, for sharing

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	10	S THWANE

this information with us. I would like to ask you a few questions.

	In your testimony you mentioned that you were forcibly removed from
Johannesburg. Was it by law, or how did this happen?

MR THWANE: Whilst resident in Johannesburg, I happened to be involved in
affairs that resulted in the uprising of 1976. We were opposed to
Afrikaans as medium of instruction. I was very prominent. As you know,
people started running all over the country. I was a member of the school
board, Midlands School Board, under the Chairmanship of the late Mr A
Lethlape.

	Apparently, Lethlape as a Mangope man, gave our names to Mangope. That
we have people here in Johannesburg who would or who could help in the
development of Bophuthatswana. Not me alone, but people like Boss
Solirathebe, Mr Mokale, quite a number of them who ultimately became
cabinet ministers here. I could not feature in the Mangope Government
although on various occasions I was offered a cabinet post, if only I was
prepared to serve under Mangope, but I flatly refused. I preferred to be
a South African at all times. That resulted in my being removed because
now the Superintendent of Midlands where I was residing, called to his
office and told me I was wanted by my people, my government. I had to
leave and vacate the house.

	I suggested to the Superintendent, let my leave my family here and go
back to Mafikeng and hear why those people want me there. Fortunately, I
still own that house up to this day because my children are still there.

He was humanly enough to allow that to happen, but I had

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	11	S THWANE

to come to Mafikeng. And I was never allowed to go back, because
immediately on arrival here, they took my pass. I was a holder of a pass
book. It was taken by the Mangope regime.

MS SEROKE: So when you came to Mafikeng and you were made those offers
and you refused what did you do? Did you find a job and did you find a
house?

MR THWANE: Fortunately, I originated from this place. So, whilst I was
working I knew that one day I will have to retire. We never thought the
country would be split into pieces and whilst I was working I built a
house here for my retirement. And it was occupied by my relatives all
along. So I had no problem with accommodation, but having refused offers
by Mangope I knew I would never be employed, unless by the private sector
and I was not just prepared.

	I felt, accepting a job would be accepting not to be a South African,
but to be a member of a bantustan regime. So I preferred to live from
hand to mouth, relying mostly on my wife who was and is still employed.
Apparently was employed by Susanna's sister. She was transferred over
here. So her job was secured all along.

MS SEROKE: You also mentioned that you were taken to Mafikeng Police
Station and on the next day you were taken to Rooigrond. What happened
that night in the Mafikeng cell after you were picked up?

MR THWANE: Fortunately, I was not the only one. Nothing happened to
anybody. We were just kept there for the night.

MS SEROKE: You have already told us what happened at Rooigrond, the
interrogation and the torture that was

administered to you. And then you were released on the 24th of February.
You have also stated that you were re-MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	12	S THWANE

detained and you wandered why you were re-detained and perhaps some of
the people may have informed against you, but subsequently say they
wanted to know where Rokie was.

Do you think that was the purpose of re-detaining you?

MR THWANE: Well, the questioning about Rokie was just part of my
re-detention. They suspected, because having relatives in Botswana, I
could have arranged for Rokie to be kept somewhere there, because all
along, until it was established Rokie was in England, my relatives in
Botswana were harassed.

	They told my at one stage they were stopped at the border. They could
not be allowed to come this end of the border. So there was that
suspicion that I has arranged for his accommodation there.

MS SEROKE: You were a member of the People's Progressive Party. And you
say part of your strategy was that Mangope should be killed if the coup
should be successful.

How did you feel when you ... a strategy of that nature.

MR THWANE: Mangope was not as it should be, humanly a respected man.
Mangope was a feared man. And once people fear a man, the only way of
relieving themselves of such fear is for the elimination of that man. So,
when I planned this I was planning it for the relieve of the people, not
for myself. That would have been for the good of everybody, except his
family of course.

MS SEROKE: Your strategy did not include other alternatives, peaceful
ways of clearing the country of this man?

MR THWANE: As far as I knew Mangope, he was the type of

man who would not accept to leave this place. The second point was that
he leaned on the South African Government

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	13	S THWANE

all along. So, I knew that ultimately they would rescue him, exactly as
they did.

MS SEROKE: You say that when you were told that you were released on the
9th of May 1989 you were relieved but it came as a surprise. Why do you
think they released you.

MR THWANE: It is because whilst in detention the warders in jail were
telling us, all of us, not me alone, that you people are going to hang.
You are facing a very serious crime of treason and I knew that treason
meant life imprisonment or death, so I as waiting for any of the two.

That I would either, if charged, be given life imprisonment or be hanged.
So, that is why it came as a surprise when I was released, but still I
had concern for those who were left behind - what was to happen to them?

MS SEROKE: Thank you Mr Thwane.

DR RANDERA: Mr Thwane you told us in great detail and I appreciate the
effort and the energy you taken in telling us the build up to the coup on
the 10th of February 1988 and what subsequently happened to you. I'm
interested to know what were you doing when you left Soweto to come to
stay in Mafikeng and what are you doing at the present time.

MR THWANE: Whilst in Johannesburg I had a comfortable job, a job that was
paying me well. I was working out at Vereniging, I was working for the
Railway Services, I was a booking clerk, selling tickets at the station.
I was then a good-paying job. I was quite comfortable. It made me bitter
to find myself loosing that job, because I was bend on working until
pensioned. I was in Dlamane but I had

had conditioned myself not to interfere with the Government money because
we assumed the rally was on by the Government and that would have
resulted in me getting a comfortable MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	14	S THWANE

pension.

	But on arrival here I ran around, I reorganised myself. After refusing
offers by the Mangope regime, I started by selling coal. I became a coal
merchant, which resulted in me building a shop. All along I was owning
that shop whilst a politician at the same time. But on my release,
because my wife could not man the shop, it was manned by relatives. It
deteriorated. I am busy trying to rebuild it at the moment to
re-establish it again. As age does not allow me to be employed I was
looking forward to be featuring in the present Government, but you know,
these things don't just come to you .....

DR RANDERA: Thank you Mr Thwane. I want to go on to my next question.
Again I just want to understand. At the time you gave your statement to
us and in your statement you say when you were questioned by the police
in Mafikeng you said you knew nothing about the coup. I understand why
you would say that at the time, but at the time that you gave your
statement to us your statement does not actually say very much about the
very central role that you yourself played from what you said to us
today, in strategizing for the coup and organizing for that coup. Why was
that?

MR THWANE: The statement that I gave to this Commission is the statement
that is in the hands of my lawyer at the moment. So, I did not want to
reveal all to my lawyer. At the time I made the statement. One has to be
very careful, because the lawyer mans the office. The office is his but
he employs people who goes through these files one might have gone
through that, gone through my file, seeing all that, then unexpectedly
revealed. And just to find myself again in trouble, so I kept most of the
information to

MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	15	S THWANE

myself, which I would I only give when appearing before the court with my
lawyer. And I did not, when making the statement here, actually talk as I
am now. I just gave over what I have asked from my lawyer.

	I asked my lawyer to give me the statement. I made a photostat copy and
I gave it to the people who were taking the statements. So now it appears
as if there is a difference. What I have said here, forms part of the
strategy and what is not right in there, was to attract the Commission to
get this information.

DR RANDERA: Mr Thwane I raised that very point because I suppose the
story for me in that is that for everybody else who is making statements,
there is nothing to fear in making the statement. And, therefore, when
people make their statements they must be as inclusive as possible and
not exclusive.

	I would like to go on to my next question. Mr Thwane you say in what you
have been talking about today in the strategising for the coup you
recognised that if it failed, it meant disaster, personally and for your
PPP, Progressive People's Party. You also go on to say you were willing
to take life, whether the life of Mangope, President Mangope at the time,
or anybody else for that matter who supported him.

	My question, therefore, is in your arrest were you, therefore, prepared
for what was going to happen to you in terms of the torture and beatings
that you experienced or

not?

MR THWANE: When people started running around for shelter, leaving the
country I decided to stay and face the rest of the law. So whatever would
have happened to me I was prepared for. Rather than allow the sufferers
to remain MMABATHO HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	16	S THWANE

suffering. People suffered a lot during the Mangope regime. He did not
value life. That is why so many people died during his time and I was
bend on revenging on behalf of the people. They did not have the nerve to
face him. Up to this day people still see him, they don't believe that he
is obscured, he is rotting at his place there. They still fear just his
appearance. His voice heard over the radio, people would say, there he is
still alive and about. I don't care for that.

DR RANDERA: Why you think the coup failed? And secondly, despite your
intimate central involvement in the planning of the coup, why do you
think you were not charged at the end of this period you were in
detention for almost three months?

MR THWANE: Whenever one is in detention, having committed a crime or not,
one is charged by implicating himself. How you approach the case, in
whatever result it comes out. So, I planned it in such a way I must
conceal the information until I die. It is fortunate that people today
know of the plans, because I am safe now. Although, possibly having
revealed this, the other people like the Security Police might decide
otherwise. But, ok, it is ok, but I don't expect it to happen. It is only
that I am a human being. You never can just guarantee anything.

DR RANDERA: Thank you sir.

MR MALAN: Mr Thwane, just two or three very brief

questions. Did I hear you correctly in saying that in all the time that
you were in detention and all the torture you never gave any information,
relating to the coup, to those that interrogated you?

MR THWANE: My response in most of the cases was, the radio MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	17	S THWANE

has stated that the police has toppled the Mangope regime and they will
hand over to the PPP, so I always told them I was not a soldier. The
soldiers toppled the Mangope regime, not the party. So I would have
featured as a member of the party on receipt of the reigns of government
from the soldiers. That is how I responded.

MR MALAN: Could I repeat the question. My question really is, you are
saying that at no stage did you disclose any information about the
planning of the coup, you did not admit any involvement in your planning
to the police?

MR THWANE: I did not.

MR MALAN: The second question is really a follow-up of Dr Randera's about
your preparedness for what really followed. If you look back on this
period, do you see yourself as a victim, or do you see yourself as one of
the major role players, or do you see yourself as both? And why I am
asking this is because the actor enjoins us to look at the perspectives
of witnesses. So how do you see yourself?

MR THWANE: Well, I have sacrificed in my life. I had told myself that
having been involved in opposing the Mangope regime I should accept the
ultimate ...

CHAIRPERSON: ... that when the coup was planned people thought of
committing murder, but by strange twist of events that did not happen,
because where murder occurs it goes on like a rolling stone. The
civilians would have been in great danger, admittedly there would have
been other lives involved, rather than those who has planned the coup,
and for this we see the moral strength of those who were involved in the
coup, that they did not remain adamant to the schemes of the plot that
they in mind earlier on.

	And we are very thankful that you have shared with the MMABATHO
HEARING	TRC/NORTH WEST



	18	S THWANE

Commission this kind of valuable information, which is information on
determination, more especially determination to rid the people of that
which is considered evil, but it was done with such graciousness if I
could call it that, that in the coup of Bophuthatswana there was no life
lost. If it was, perhaps it was long thereafter. For this we are truly
grateful and you can rest assured that the Commission takes kindly to
what you have done and you can be assured of our support at any time when
needed.

	We thank you and your family and your community that you were able to be
with us here and share with us. Thank you.

DR RANDERA: Chairperson, I would like to suggest that we break for tea
now and come back at 11 o'clock.

COMMISSION BREAKS FOR TEA

