
			

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 18/20-06-96			NAME: BISHOP TIYA

CASE: EC0239/96			UMTATA

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Good morning, Mr Sandi to lead the witness.

MR SANDI: Thank you Mr Chairperson. I just want to make sure that on the
Tiya family side, we would like to know who is giving evidence - is it
the mother or father who is going to give evidence, because during our
lunch Mrs Tiya stated that although it is Bishop Tiya who has given the
statement he preferred that she will take over and give evidence because
she is trying to protect his husband who is ill, so Mrs Tiya.

MRS TIYA: Yes, it is so.

MR SANDI: Could you please take an oath. Please stand up.

MRS TIYA: (sworn states).

MR SANDI: Mrs Tiya, you said you are staying at Zandukwana at Libode. Aga
is your son, was your son?

MRS TIYA: Yes, Aga was my son.

MR SANDI: When was he born?

MRS TIYA: He was born on the 30th January 1963.

MR SANDI: 30th January 1963.

MRS TIYA: Yes, 30th January 1963.

MR SANDI: According to the statement here, did you say Aga was attending
school or was a student in 1980 here in the University of the Transkei?

MRS TIYA: Pardon me. Aga started to be a scholar at St. Patricks. He did
his matric at Zingiza School. If I can remember very well about his
political involvement the teacher from Zingiza came to report that he was
arrested and detained. During that time there was a curfew but it was
reported that he was with some of the people who who are not attending
school and they were outside the school premises. What he said, he said,
the child has reported that he will skip the country and then he said the
teacher there he would not give this information to the police. So they
said they didn't see anybody else except the fact that it was said the
child should not mix with the other people who are politically minded and
then he completed his matriculation here at Zingiza.

MR SANDI: You said Aga was a student here at UNITRA where we are holding
these hearings. Did you say the other day the Police came to ask for him?
Can you please take it from there and proceed with your statement.

MRS TIYA: Yes, the Police came and they said they are looking for Aga and
they said they didn't find him at UNITRA and it is almost two weeks that
they are looking for him. We knew when we last did see him and we knew
that he came to request money for school fees and then he was given this
money. He came to pay amount of money, so we were surprised to learn that
he was not here for two weeks. So when we stated that, they left without
any much to say. After two days they came again. It was in 1984 when they
reported back to say that Aga is not at school. They gave us information
that he is in Lesotho and they stated that they have received information
that he was a very threatening person and he was a threat to the
Government of the Transkei. They stated that, they were just giving me
information that the Security Police were supposed to detain him when he
left the country. But it was also stated that the Police wanted to kill
him. It was also stated that he jumped over the fences and didn't go
properly from school. It was also further mentioned that he communicated
with the people across the borders who were also politically minded. They
also said you must be able to assist us to get him. If you know that you
have relatives in Lesotho please pass the message that we would like to
see him because he has caused a lot of problems in the Transkei but they
promised that they wouldn't do anything to him. After they left we just
kept quiet because we didn't even know about the Lesotho. They were
harassing for quite a long time after that a certain Mr Tengwa came in
and we were at the funeral at Charlie's place in Ntlolo. Charlie had a
wife who was from the family of the Matanzima and Matanzima family were
also attending the funeral. The people watched me as I was being dragged
along and being pushed to the car which was next to the crowds. They
wanted me to go and this the statements and how was Aga transported or
taken away to Lesotho. They wanted every information about Aga. Wanted to
know about his friends and everybody who was related to him. They wanted
me to write down everything. I did as they expected me. I also mentioned
that he used to accommodate some of the people to be at our place. When
he was still at a school in Ngiza he used to come and request
accommodation for his friends. And we were not surprised about that
because we liked his friends. Their father was injured when he was
operated upon on the head, so they requested that I should assist because
Mr Matanzima says he wants the child Aga - in other words he wants the
child to be fetched from were he is. I then requested permission from my
husband to go to Lesotho and then my father said he will never do that -
he will never allow me to send my child to the Police. It was clear that
they knew he was being in Lesotho to take along everything and the
ideologies of the ANC. At the end we had to go to Lesotho. We mentioned
this to our friends and then we stated how we felt about all this and
what was happening and we were ordered that we should take him along and
fetch him from Lesotho. We stayed for two days and then we came back we
reported that we were unable to trace him. There were some Security who
were at Nkombu who used to come fortnightly and check what was happening
around us. They were harassing us in other ways. When we came back again
they came along and visited us. We gave them the information that we just
met some of the children who are able to speak Xhosa and the children
tried to explain that we were looking for Aga. We were cross-questioned
by these children at Lesotho and then we stated that we were informed and
given orders by the King that we should be able to trace him back and
take him back to the Transkei. So these girls that we met in Lesotho
informed us about another spot where they used to see some of the youth
who used to stay there. When we visited this place it looked deserted
during the night - apparently it was not utilised at night. Somebody
informed us that if we should go there we were informed that we could get
into trouble because somebody has conveyed the message that we were dogs,
because we came from Matanzima's place.

MR SANDI: Did you see Aga.

MRS TIYA: No. He had disappeared totally. Nobody knew anything about him.

MR SANDI: Did you get any information about where he did go or what
happened to him.

MRS TIYA: We didn't get much about him, it was only the Reverend who was
a Roman Catholic who was from Zimbabwe and she also used to visit
Tanzania. In 1990 this Reverend, in 1987 he brought a letter stating that
there was one child who was Tanzania attending school there. We were
requested that we should accommodate this child from Tanzania so we
suspected that this Reverend was the one who was organising all this. It
was stated that these child who is in Tanzania was a child to Aga. There
was nothing that could prove that and it was also clear that maybe the
Priest could also assist to get this child. ...(indistinct) day, I
couldn't see him because it was said that he was at the intensive care
unit, but after that I wanted to see him when he was discharged from this
unit.

MR SANDI: Do you say that he was discharged from hospital?

MRS TIYA: Yes, he was discharged from hospital and then at the end he was
able to speak. He was arrested again and was taken to Wellington.

MR SANDI: How long did he stay in jail?

MRS TIYA: Since 1988 he was detained for - from 1988 to 1990 October he
was released on bail and there was an order that he was to appear in
court in February.

MR SANDI: How long did he stay in the hospital before he was charged for
Terrorism Act?

MRS TIYA: I've forgotten a bit about that, but I think he was released in
hospital and then a charge was laid against him in 1989. I cannot
remember whether he spent eight months in the hospital.

MR SANDI: OK. Never mind if you can't remember, it is not a problem. Who
was defending his case?

MRS TIYA: The Minister of Justice presently, who is Dullah Omar was the
one who was his lawyer.

MR SANDI: Were you able to attend the Court proceedings?

MRS TIYA: We were unable to do so. Even if we weren't there we were never
expected to come in, we were prohibited from getting inside - we were
always outside the court room.

MR SANDI: What happened to the accusations that were lodged against him?

MRS TIYA: Someday, some people from the Goza family came in and saying he
was wanted, he was then taken to Court and it was said that the case was
withdrawn against him and it was just after the unbanning of the
Organisations. All the Political Organisations.

MR SANDI: Did you say in 1990 and 1991 you learnt that he was shot dead
and was brought along by some people?

MRS TIYA: Shot, no, I cannot remember that he was shot.

MR SANDI: No, what I mean is when he was shot dead what happened?

MRS TIYA: It was in 1992 in January. We didn't hear anything from anybody
about his death, but there were rumours that Aga was found next to the
Roman Catholic - he was alone in a car and he was shot dead.

MR SANDI: Did you find his body and where did you find it?

MRS TIYA: Yes, his body was found but I was so much affected and I don't
know what happened.

MR SANDI: During the funeral can you remember what happened during the
funeral - were there any police present. Were you able to proceed well
without any problems with the funeral? OK. You can take your time - we
will wait for you.

MRS TIYA: There was nobody to come to give us the bad tidings - all we
had was that he was at the mortuary and then we went there.

MR SANDI: Mrs Tiya, I don't want you to get into too much details about
all what happened that day. I don't want to evoke more pain from you as
you are already experiencing now. I would just like to ask one question.
I don't say you must mention names, but I would just like to know was
there anybody who came to report that he has any knowledge about what
happened to say that he was present when this happened, is that so?

MRS TIYA: Yes, there was somebody who stated that he wants to come to the
Truth Commission because he was present when this happened. The person
said he would like to come here to the Truth Commission and it was stated
that we would visit him, but that person denied flatly and said he has
never said anything about being there.

MR SANDI: In other words, you are saying this person is denying any
knowledge about what happened?

MRS TIYA: Yes, this person is denying.

MR SANDI: OK. Let's proceed. Was there any inquest in connection with
this. Maybe to have any suspects brought to Court?

MRS TIYA: There were not even investigations, nobody was ever charged for
what happened.

MR SANDI: In other words, if I understand you very well, amongst the
requests there at home, you would like the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission should investigate and make a follow-up of who was there and
who were the perpetrators who could cause this brutality.

MRS TIYA: Yes, if it has powers, I would like that to do that. We were
very disappointed because not even the members of the ANC could come and
find out if they can give us any assistance.

MR SANDI: Is there any other request that you would like to present to
the Commission?

MRS TIYA: Yes, there is. We would like that if the child who is in
Tanzania could be brought back again. We would be very grateful because
if this child had already being with us and then the mother took the
child away again. We regard the child as the heir to the family.

MR SANDI: Is that all that you could say to us before I can hand over to
the Chairperson?

MRS TIYA: The explanation is that the people wanted to make us a
tombstone, we as family we wanted to go to the office of the ANC so that
they can assist us with these arrangements but because I always forget, I
am a forgetful person, I forgot to make a follow-up about that.

MR SANDI: Did you go to any lawyer for what happened to your son?

MRS TIYA: Yes, we did go to the Sangoni lawyers to get assistance but
even at the police, nobody could state how this took place. Nobody ever
knew what happened to our son.

MR SANDI: Do you think maybe you have left out anything that you would
have liked to be presented here at the Commission? If you have something,
you can please state it now. If there is none, then I can hand over to
the Chairperson.

MRS TIYA: As my husband is now ill, when he was arrested and the day when
my son was also arrested, my husband was also assaulted and they made his
condition worse - they aggravated the situation and he is now amnesiac.
We have a doctor who is our family doctor as he is suffering from amnesia
- when he is disturbed my husband is always under pressure and is unable
to think properly. Dr Mtankulu is our family doctor.

MR SANDI: Thank you very much Mrs Tiya - if there are any things that you
would like to present for what you can still do that when my colleagues
will be asking questions. Thank you very much. I will hand over to the
Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: I'd like to find out from Elias first. When he talks about
the re-investment, what does he mean? Does he mean compensation or does
he mean that he could get assistance, medical assistance?

MR NTSHINGA: I want to be compensated.

MR SANDI: OK. Thank you very much. I'd like you to give us information,
what do you mean when you say you should be reimbursed, do you want
medical assistance or do you want the cost to be paid?

MR NTSHINGA: My eardrum has been ruptured and my eye, my right eye, the
nerves have been snapped so I would like assistance in that regard.

MR SANDI: OK. Thank you very much.



