
	1	M TULE

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: TOZAMA JENNIFER MDYESHA

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________CHAIRPERSON: We
will therefore ask Michael Tule to come forward as a witness, we thank
you for your presence. You are going to be lead by Ms Maya.

MICHAEL TULE: (sworn states)

MS MAYA: Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Tule, you said in your statement
that you saw a policeman by the name of Fouche standing on top of the
hippo and he had a red flag and when he dropped it, the shooting started
and that is when you were shot. Could you briefly explain to us what
actually happened to you?

MR TULE: In 1985, on the 21 March, I went to a funeral in Kwanobuhle, but
when I got to no.16, and lifted my head, I saw Whites in hippos and
police vans.

MS MAYA: Without interrupting, like we've been doing, you can just
mention how you got injured. That is at the time of the shooting.

MR TULE: The Whites shot me on my head and I fell down, and I was
unconscious and when I regained consciousness it was after 2 weeks and I
was in Livingstone Hospital. I asked one nurse why was I there, they had
tied my hands and feet,

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	M TULE

and they said I had been running mad.

MS MAYA: Who told you that?

MR TULE: It was the nurse that told me that I was running mad.

MS MAYA: How long were you in hospital?

MR TULE: I was there for 3 days after 3 weeks.

MS MAYA: And then what happened when you were discharged?

MR TULE: When I was in hospital, I was trained to walk and then some
White men who I did not know, came and they said they wanted me. We
should go. Then I did not ask them where to. Then they took me and put me
into a police van and drove me to Church Street, here in Uitenhage and
they locked me up. I was there for 3 days and a certain man, unknown to
me, came and he said he was a lawyer so he said he had come to fetch me
and that is how I was discharged.

MS MAYA: After that, when people were called to Jubilee Hotel, were you
not one of them?

MR TULE: Yes, I was.

MS MAYA: Was there any amount you received from the government?

MR TULE: Yes, I did.

MS MAYA: And after they shot you on the head, did you lead a normal life
and work the way you used to?

MR TULE: No, I was very hurt because now I would have some blackouts
which started after 1985, even today I am still taking some treatment.

MS MAYA: Surely you must be having a request to this Commission. How can
you be helped?

MR TULE: My first request is that those Whites that shot there, now, I
would like this Commission to investigate about these perpetrators, these
White perpetrators, who are

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	3	M TULE

they.

	Secondly, I do go to the clinic to get treatment, but from 1985 they
have been giving me the same type of pills, and I don't get cured, so if
this Commission could organise that I should see another doctor I would
be happy.

	The third request is, I wish that they could erect a monument right here
in front of this City Hall because I see a monument of some unknown
person to me, so I would like that they should erect a monument here in
front of this City Hall, in memory of the incident. Again I ask this
Commission, that this hall is not used by Whites only and not Blacks and
so I am asking that in future, the Blacks will be allowed to use this
hall.

MS MAYA: I would like to make a request. I know that all these things
that are mentioned by this witness they are supported by the residents of
this place, but we have got a limited time because we have intentions to
go to the scene where this incident occurred so as you keep on clapping
and taking time to stop, that is eating up the time. I am really pleading
you, I am not stopping you from clapping, because I know it is the way
you are showing the support to the witnesses as a community, but I am
asking that you just clap for a very short time and then stop. You agree
to that, yes, thank you. We thank you Mr Tule.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mr Tule.

---------------------



