
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	YOUTH HEARINGS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	3 JUNE 1997	

NAME:	VELELENI A TWALA

CASE:	JB2820 	-	LEANDRA

DAY 1

__________________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: I would like to call the next witness please, Veleleni Twala
who will tell us a story also from Lebohang.

MS SEROKE: She is not here.

CHAIRPERSON: Yes, she is. Can you hear clearly through the earphones? You
can, thank you. If you could please tell us who is sitting with you?

MRS TWALA: He is my son.

CHAIRPERSON: We would like to welcome him as well. You are going to tell
us about two other sons, going back to 1982. Before you do that could I
please ask you to stand and take the oath.

VELELENI A TWALA: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. To help you with your story I will ask Joyce
Seroke, please, to lead your evidence. Thank you, Joyce.

MS SEROKE: We welcome you Mrs Twala. We would like you to tell us about
your son, Jabu, who was shot in the streets in Leslie on the 16th of
January 1982. What I would like to ask from you is that.

MRS TWALA: What happened on that day, after the closing from work I could
not understand Jabu's health. Then I requested the police station to take
care of him in December. Then I will take him in January. After that Jabu
was released and then he came back home during the day. Thereafter he
went to town. He got shot by the police under whose custody he was. Then
I was called in from home to come and, I was called in that my son was
shot.

MS SEROKE: What was this son shot for, your son shot for?

MRS TWALA: The person who was with Jabu could not say any, told us that
Jabu has not done anything.

MS SEROKE: According to your explanation you said Jabu was not feeling
well after closing from work. So actually what made you to take Jabu to
the police station to be taken care of, that made you not to take care of
him yourself?

MRS TWALA: I was afraid that maybe he may be harmed, because he could not
stay at home. He was just roaming in the streets. I think he was mentally
ill. I suspected that he was not, mentally ill. Then I requested the
police to take care of him until January after three months.

MS SEROKE: So when was he released from the police station?

MRS TWALA: I cannot remember. I am not so sure of the date.

MS SEROKE: According to your statement Jabu was shot by an Officer Botha.
Did you go to Mr Botha and enquire about the reasons for shooting Jabu?

MRS TWALA: I did not go, because we were already fighting.

MS SEROKE: Who was fighting?

MRS TWALA: There were many police.

MS SEROKE: What did you do after Jabu was shot?

MRS TWALA: Nothing happened. Jabu was taken to the mortuary. Then when I
went to collect his dead body I was told that the District Surgeon was
not through with his body whereas he was already taken to another
mortuary. Then I was assisted by one of the lawyers who phoned the Leslie
Mortuary and instructed them to release my son so that I can be able to
bury.

MS SEROKE: Are there any papers that were given explaining on how Jabu
was killed? Is there any post mortem report given to you? Is that the
death certificate or the report of the post mortem?

MRS TWALA: No, it is just the statement.

MS SEROKE: Okay.

MRS TWALA: That lawyer did not give us anything.

MS SEROKE: The lawyer, Mr Mamesa, who was sought to assist you by
releasing the body of your son, was there any case that he opened
regarding the shooting of your son?

MRS TWALA: No, he just wrote the statement and thereafter I was called in
by another attorney stating that that, that attorney has disappeared with
other people's statements. So I was advised to take that statement and
take further steps with it.

MS SEROKE: Did you?

MRS TWALA: No, I did not take any, the statement was not taken. It was
said that it is old.

MS SEROKE: According to your statement you told us about Josia Twala who
was buried by the police in, whilst he was still in Davidton. What was
Josia doing in Davidton?

MRS TWALA: He had visited his biological father in Davidton.

MS SEROKE: Was he a politician?

MRS TWALA: No, I had sent him to his biological father and whilst he went
there he got shot.

MS SEROKE: Did you manage to get hold of his corpse?

MRS TWALA: No, I did not.

MS SEROKE: Did they show you where he was buried?

MRS TWALA: They came, the CIDs.

MS SEROKE: How did you get to know that Josia was killed and buried?

MRS TWALA: We had visitors from the police.

MS SEROKE: What did they say to you?

MRS TWALA: They asked me when did I last see Josia. I told them that I
had sent him to his biological father and then I even gave them the
dates. Told them that it was during the Easter holidays. Then they told
me that that person has long been buried. He was buried by the police.

MS SEROKE: Did his father tell you that he did arrive?

MRS TWALA: The father told me that he did arrive, but we do not know what
happened on his way back.

MS SEROKE: Your attorney, Mamesa, is he still around?

MRS TWALA: We do not know. It was said that he disappeared with other
peoples statements. Then their office was taken over by another lawyer.

MS SEROKE: By the time Jabu got shot what was happening in Lebohang
township?

MRS TWALA: Nothing was happening.

MS SEROKE: Was there no marches or protests or anything of that nature?

MRS TWALA: Jabu was shot long before the marches or the uprisings or
anything.

MS SEROKE: Thank you Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you sis Joyce. Wynand Malan, do you have any questions?

MR MALAN: Mrs Twala, just again, you got the information, it seems, from
a Mr Simon Mokwena. Is that correct? Who told you about your son's death?

MS SEROKE: Repeat.

MR MALAN: Sorry. My question, Mrs Twala, is in the statement that you
gave us you say that the witness who saw the shooting was a certain Mr
Simon Mokwena, it seems to me. Is that correct? Where is Mr Mokwena now?

MS SEROKE: It is the same gentlemen who was in, the Reverend.

MR MALAN: Is that the Reverend? Thank you. The translation is not getting
to my headphones. So the information, I mean this is very difficult to
understand, because the information in your statement says that your son,
Jabu, was walking in the street. This Mr Botha, who is the police
officer, walks up to him, tells him he is a racist and full of apartheid
and he shoots him. I mean that is the information before us. That is very
difficult to understand without a broader context. Do you have more
information as to the context or should we speak to Mr Mokwena?

MRS TWALA: You can talk to Mr Mokwena.

MR MALAN: You have no other source of information except Mr Mokwena?

MRS TWALA: Mr Mokwena is the one who collected the body and took it to
the mortuary.

MR MALAN: So was Mr Mokwena also present at the shooting? Did he see the
shooting?

MRS TWALA: That can be explained by Mr Mokwena.

MR MALAN: Mrs Twala, if I may just ask you the question. Did Mr Mokwena
tell you that he saw the shooting? That is really my question. I will ask
him the detail, but to your knowledge did he see, did he observe Jabu's
shooting?

MRS TWALA: I am not so sure whether he was present during the incident,
but what he told me is that he is the one who collected the body and the
blood.

MR MALAN: Okay, thank you very much Mrs Twala.

CHAIRPERSON: Tom Manthata.

MR MANTHATA: Mrs Twala, I think I have only got one question. Would you
tell us whether, of course with, whether you knew the activities of your
sons. That is whether you knew what they were actually doing, whether
amongst their mates, that is those of his age group or just ordinary
mates?

MRS TWALA: No, I did not know anything, because Jabu was employed and he
was the only source of support from the family.

MR MANTHATA: And then Josia?

MRS TWALA: Josia was also employed. There was nothing funny that he was
doing.

MR MANTHATA: You do not even know whether he could have been involved
with the youths who were meddling in politics so to say?

MRS TWALA: No, my lord.

MR MANTHATA: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Ma Twala, I would like to ask just one more question
following on what Tom Manthata has asked. I mean, do you yourself,
because you have had a long time to think about all this, do you think
there was any political motive, firstly for Jabu's killing and secondly
for Josia's disappearance?

MRS TWALA: I do not know, because Jabu was the first person to be shot in
the township.

CHAIRPERSON: I mean, what, the story that you tell us is very full of
sadness and it is very difficult for, I think it is difficult for all of
us on the panel to know how to respond positively. We obviously
sympathise with you very much for the story that you tell and we share
your sadness, because we can understand that. On the one hand you have a
son that is shot. On the other hand you have a son who just disappears
and then there is no actual detail which will help you, because we all
live by information. So it is a very difficult story for us to react to.
What we will try and do, you have mentioned Mfondis Mokwena so we will
try and follow up with him to see what more we can do. You do mention in
your statement that you have suffered medical problems as well. If you
could tell the briefers more about them, because there might be something
that we can do there to help through the local authorities, but we would
like to thank you very much for coming. Thank you Mama.

MRS TWALA: Ever since then my health deteriorated.

	------------------------------

