
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	13-05-1997	

NAME:	MTHUNZI W.T. TYAKUME

CASE: 	KING WILLIAM'S TOWN

DAY 2

________________________________

CHAIRMAN:	Wellington Tyakume.

MTHUNZI WELLINGTON TIBI TYAKUME:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Mr Chairperson, he has been properly sworn in.

CHAIRMAN:	Mr Sandi?

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Mr Chairperson. Mr Tyakume, you are from Dimbaza, is
that so?

MR TYAKUME:	Yes, sir.

ADV SANDI:	And you are going to talk about your son, Dumalisile sydney
Tyakume?

MR TYAKUME:	Yes, sir.

ADV SANDI:	How old was he?

MR TYAKUME:	He was 20.

ADV SANDI:	According to your statement he was shot dead.

MR TYAKUME:	Yes, sir.

ADV SANDI:	When did this happen?

MR TYAKUME:	The 27th of September 1977.

ADV SANDI:	Who shot him?

MR TYAKUME:	Warrant Officer Mayekiso.

ADV SANDI:	What was happening in Dimbaza at that time?

MR TYAKUME:	There was a rally, a students' rally. The children were
boycotting classes. Police were called in in King William's Town. They
were forcing the children to go back to class.

	The children ran around the township, trying to escape the police. It
was break time at about eleven o'clock.

ADV SANDI:	Did the school children have complaints?

MR TYAKUME:	No, there were no complaints. It was the Steve Biko boycott.
Steve Biko had just passed away, it was shortly after that.

ADV SANDI:	According to your statement, there was a complaint about
children being taught in Afrikaans.

MR TYAKUME:	Yes, that too.

ADV SANDI:	Tell me all about it.

MR TYAKUME:	Well, I can't remember well. I am going to lie to you.

ADV SANDI:	As an elderly man, respected man, you forgot?

MR TYAKUME:	Yes.

ADV SANDI:	Were they not saying that they should not be taught in
Afrikaans any more?

MR TYAKUME:	I can't remember well, it is probably so. You forget when a
long time elapses. It has been 20 years, I don't remember.

ADV SANDI:	Was Warrant Officer Mayekiso arrested?

MR TYAKUME:	No, he was not arrested. I had to go to Unit 10 to talk about
this. We went there two days. I am talking about Zone 10, the
Magistrate's court.

ADV SANDI:	What happened there in court?

MR TYAKUME:	Magistrate Marais with Noqaba did not get any leads.

ADV SANDI:	Therefore nobody was charged?

MR TYAKUME:	No one was charged, no one was found guilty.

ADV SANDI:	Did you have a legal representative for advice?

MR TYAKUME:	No, not at all. We just buried our child and that was that.

ADV SANDI:	I noticed that when the statement was taken from you, Mr
Tyakume, when you were asked if you had any requests, you said that the
Commission will see what it can offer.

MR TYAKUME:	But I need some form of compensation.

ADV SANDI:	Is that all Mr Tyakume.

MR TYAKUME:	I have nothing to add.

ADV SANDI:	Do you see Mr Mayekiso around Dimbaza?

MR TYAKUME:	I saw him once, I don't remember which year it was. His home
is in Dimbaza. I was still working at that time, I had not pensioned,
this is before 1987.

ADV SANDI:	He no longer works there?

MR TYAKUME:	No, he had just gone home in Dimbaza. At the time he was
working in Zwelitsha.

ADV SANDI:	Thank you Mr Tyakume, I will hand you over to the Chairperson,
thank you.

MS CRICHTON:	Can you hear me Mr Tyakume.

MR TYAKUME:	I hear you clearly.

MS CRICHTON:	That's good. I wanted to find out from you about something
that is in your statement where it says that there was one Mthunzi
Tyakume who was actually an eye-witness to the event, is that correct?

MR TYAKUME:	Yes.

MS CRICHTON:	And yet you are saying at the inquest they decided to find
nobody liable because there was a lack of evidence.

MR TYAKUME:	That is so.

MS CRICHTON:	Was Mthunzi at the inquest?

MR TYAKUME:	I was there.

MS CRICHTON:	Thank you. You are Mthunzi, I am sorry? I see that they have
put you down as a witness as well as being a deponent, thank you. Thank
you.

MR TYAKUME:	It is I.

MS MAYA:	Mr Tyakume, I just want to ask one question for clarity because
we did meet and talked. You said that Dumalisile was your first-born?

MR TYAKUME:	Exactly.

MS MAYA:	Therefore if he was still alive, you would be leaning on him
quite a lot?

MR TYAKUME:	That is exactly how it is.

MS MAYA:	Therefore you said to the Commission that when they meet your
needs, they must have in mind that this was your first born child?

MR TYAKUME:	Precisely.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you Tiny. Thank you Mr Tyakume for the evidence that
you brought before us. We all know that the police at that time did as
they pleased, they were the law.

	We trust that as we are going to take these requests before the
President, at least some of your needs will be met.

	Thank you sir, we hope that at least some of your pain has healed.

MR TYAKUME:	Thank you sir.

	--------------------

