
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23-09-1996		NAME: WILSON VANDOYI

CASE: DUNCAN VILLAGE

DAY 1



REVD FINCA:	Thank you very much Mr Mbengo. I would now call Wilson
Vandoyi.

REVD XUNDU:	I would like him to take an oath Mr Chairman.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Vandoyi for coming in front of this Commission.
Revd Xundu will take you in oath in the name of the Truth Commission and
he will be the one asking you questions on behalf of the Commission,
thank you.

REVD XUNDU:	Please stand up Mr Wilson.

WILSON VANDOYI:	(sworn states)

REVD XUNDU:	Chairperson and the President of this Commission gives me
this opportunity to ask you questions. What is your clan name sir?

W VANDOYI:	I'm from the Mtandi clan.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you. In your statement you said you were staying in the
men's hostel. Were you there with your family or alone?

W VANDOYI:	I was staying there with my family.

REVD XUNDU:	On this day on which you were arrested, you said you heard
the shots being fired, can you please tell us what happened on that day?

W VANDOYI:	On that day I went out of my house at about four o'clock. I
went out of my house after four o'clock and I went through the Douglas
Street. I went through the Douglas Street, when I was approaching the
hostel, I heard shots being fired.	

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			W VANDOYI

REVD XUNDU:	What time was it at that time?

W VANDOYI:	It was after four o'clock, but I'm not sure, but it was before
half past four. I hears shots being fired, while I was still looking
around, I heard the bullet in the back of my arm.

	I fell down. It was still, the sun was still light, it was not dark. I
didn't see the people who were shooting me. I just heard noises from the
hostel. I was still conscious a little bit at that time. People from the
hostel said that the person who was shot should be taken. Two policemen
came and I had the bullet inside my body.

	I wanted to stand up but I couldn't.

REVD XUNDU:	Where did the police take you?

W VANDOYI:	They took me to the hospital.

REVD XUNDU:	What happened in the hospital?

W VANDOYI:	I was semi-conscious but when the police came to me, I
regained my consciousness. While I was in the van, the police van I was
unconscious. I didn't know where I was. I regained my consciousness at
night in the hospital.

REVD XUNDU:	Please continue.

W VANDOYI:	I regained my consciousness in the hospital at night and I was
feeling pain and I was also afraid.

REVD XUNDU:	You got scared, and did you sleep over at the hospital?

W VANDOYI:	I didn't know where I was. On the morning I slept two weeks in
the hospital and we went home. Before I went home, I slept there on
Friday. On Monday it was the third day, three policemen came and they
were wearing green clothes and they were called the Green Barrets in the
township.

	They asked me my name and I told them. They asked me

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			W VANDOYI

other things but I don't clearly remember.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you recognise this policemen?

W VANDOYI:	No, I don't know who they are.	

REVD XUNDU:	Did they come back on the 18th as you've said in your
statement?

W VANDOYI:	Yes. After the three policemen went, the other two policemen
came the same day. They asked details and they went.

	On the 18th they came to my house and they told me to go to Frick Street
and I went there on the morning, on the 19th. I went there on the morning
of the 19th.

REVD XUNDU:	What happened in Frick Street? Did you give any statements?

W VANDOYI:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Who said that ... (intervention)

W VANDOYI:	The policeman who brought me from home.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you know his name?

W VANDOYI:	I think his surname is Qoboshiyane.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you write a statement?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, I did, but I firstly asked the question before writing
the statement. They said that the statement concerns the way I was
injured. They asked me whether I knew the people who shot me and then I
said no.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you really not know the people that shot you?

W VANDOYI:	No, I didn't know them.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you know whether they were policemen or just ordinary
people?

W VANDOYI:	I know they were policemen, because they were in the police
van wearing green clothes.

REVD FINCA:	I want you to be clear, I don't want you to

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			W VANDOYI

say you don't know whether they were policemen or what, I want you to be
clear and specific. Do you say you were shot by policemen or ...

W VANDOYI:	Yes, they were policemen.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you. Please continue.

REVD XUNDU:	Where did you meet Jeram?

W VANDOYI:	 After submitting my statement I went to Jeram.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you submit your statement?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, I did.

REVD XUNDU:	You went to Jeram?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, after submitting my statement. I told him what happened.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you trying to claim?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, I was. He asked me questions of whether I know these
people and then I told him that I don't know this policeman, I was just
on my way, I didn't see any van. I didn't see any police van, I just saw
it when they took me with it to the hospital. He tried to submit this
claim but he said that I don't have a witness.

REVD XUNDU:	What about the people from the hostel who saw you? Did they
come to give evidence?

W VANDOYI:	No, they did not. I went to them, those who said they saw me
when I was shot, but they didn't go there.

REVD XUNDU:	In other words you didn't get any witness to support your
story?

W VANDOYI:	Yes.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you go to Black Sash?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, I did.

REVD XUNDU:	What about Mr Lalla?

W VANDOYI:	I went to one Doctor, but I forgot his name,

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			W VANDOYI

he gave me Mr Lalla.

REVD XUNDU:	Ma Lalla is a lawyer.

W VANDOYI:	Yes, he's a lawyer. I received a letter from Mr Lalla calling
me to come to his office. But the case was difficult because he said I
didn't have a witness and I don't know who shot me.

REVD XUNDU:	In your statement to Officer Qoboshiyane, did you tell him
that you were shot by policemen?

W VANDOYI:	Can you please repeat.

REVD XUNDU:	When you were making your statement to Mr Qoboshiyane?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, I did tell him that I was shot by policemen, but we
didn't have a witness. I told Mr Qoboshiyane that I was shot by
policemen. And after taking the statement he came to take me to the place
where I was shot and I showed him that I was sleeping there.

REVD XUNDU:	At this time it was the time of political activities. Were
you a member of any political organisation?

W VANDOYI:	No, I was not a member. These people shot you when you were
alone.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you alone or were there any other people with you?

W VANDOYI:	I was alone at that time.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you working at that time?

W VANDOYI:	No, I was not working.

REVD XUNDU:	You were staying there with your wife? You were staying in
the hostel with your wife?

W VANDOYI:	I didn't say I was staying in the hostel.

REVD XUNDU:	Were you not staying in the hostel?

W VANDOYI:	No, I didn't stay in the hostel, I was just DUNCAN VILLAGE
HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			W VANDOYI

passing the hostel on my way to Duncan Village. I was staying in Duncan
Village.

REVD XUNDU:	Where exactly were you injured?

W VANDOYI:	On my lower shoulder.

REVD XUNDU:	As a result of that, do you have any problems with your
shoulder?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, I do because my arm cannot work properly. I had an
operation.

REVD XUNDU:	Did you work after this incident?

W VANDOYI:	No.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you have any other means of support now?

W VANDOYI:	No, but I tried to apply for a pension and I succeeded at that
time. But now they told me to go to the Doctor in order to receive more
pension.

REVD XUNDU:	Do you have any request to the Commission? Although we are
not deciding the one who are deciding what to do with the people's cases,
but will you please just tell us your request.

W VANDOYI:	My request to the Commission is since I am unable to work at
this present time, I can't even - I can't work with my arm because it is
so painful. My request is that I have five children and I would like the
Commission to educate my children.

REVD XUNDU:	Which standards are they?

W VANDOYI:	The first one is in standard 8, the second one is in standard
7, the third one is in standard 3, the fourth one is in lower standards
and the last one is not at school.

REVD XUNDU:	Thank you sir.

REVD FINCA:	Any questions? You were behaving yourself during the day so I
hope that you will behave until the end. DUNCAN VILLAGE
HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			W VANDOYI

There are situations which need to be laughed, but please don't do that
for a long time. We'll give this opportunity to Mr Ntsikelelo Sandi to
ask questions.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Chair. Mr Vandoyi, I would like to ask you some
questions in order for me to get some clarity on what really happened.
Firstly do you know who shot you?

W VANDOYI:	No, I don't know.

MR SANDI:	Do you have any suspicions of who shot you?

W VANDOYI:	No, I don't have any suspicions, I was just on my way - there
is no one who I can say who might shoot me.

MR SANDI:	You said this happened on the 28th of November 1986? Were there
any other things happening here in Duncan Village?

W VANDOYI:	No. There was nothing happening on that day, there was no
toyi-toyi on that day.

MR SANDI:	On the spot where you were shot, was there any conflict between
the people and the police?

W VANDOYI:	No, there was no conflict. There was nothing on that day,
there was no toyi-toyi.

MR SANDI:	The people who saw you being shot, what did they say?

W VANDOYI:	The ones I went to they just said they saw me when I was taken
by the police, the two witnesses. When I went to them, they didn't want
to go to the lawyers. When I went to them, they didn't want to come out,
they were so scared.

MR SANDI:	These are the people who said you were shot by the police?

W VANDOYI:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	What were they afraid of?

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8			W VANDOYI

W VANDOYI:	I don't know, but it seems as if they were afraid of being
arrested.	One of them said so.

MR SANDI:	Do you know where we can reach these people?

W VANDOYI:	I wrote their name when I was submitting my statement.

MR SANDI:	Thank you Mr Vandoyi. Thank you Mr Chairman.

REVD FINCA:		Mr Vandoyi, you said the two witnesses was so important in
the story, you know their names?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, I know their names.

REVD FINCA:	I don't see their names in your statement, can you please
give us their names? I don't see their names in your statement, will you
please give us their names?

W VANDOYI:	They are Mlulami Jwambi. Mlulami Jwambi.

REVD FINCA:	And the second one?

W VANDOYI:	Sonwabo Xoko. Sonwabo, the surname is Xoko.

REVD FINCA:	Do you know where they are staying?

W VANDOYI:	Yes. They are staying here in Duncan Village. They are staying
in Mgaleni Section.

REVD FINCA:	Do you meet them now?

W VANDOYI:	Yes.

REVD FINCA:	Why did they refuse to support you since they have this
important information about your story and their information seems to be
the only one who can help this case to continue? Why did they refuse?

W VANDOYI:	They said they were afraid, they were scared of being
arrested, because at that time people were arrested a lot. In 1986 people
were arrested when testifying.

REVD FINCA:	Since we are free now, why are they still afraid?

W VANDOYI:	When I submitted my statement, I wrote their names.

DUNCAN VILLAGE HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	9			W VANDOYI

REVD FINCA:	Were they afraid at that time?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, they were afraid before we got freedom.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you. Dr Kahn, as you have mentioned him in your
statement, was he the Doctor who examined you after you got injured?

W VANDOYI:	Yes, he also sent me to Mr Lalla.

REVD FINCA:	Was it Dr Kahn?

W VANDOYI:	Yes.

REVD FINCA:	Where can we reach him?

W VANDOYI:	I think he left this place, he is in Cape Town. He was here in
day, in day hospital then, but he is in Cape Town now. Maybe you'll find
he's there in the hospital although he's gone. My file is still there, I
forgot something. After I went, going to Jeram, I didn't get my file in
the hospital.

	I looked for it, but I couldn't find it, and they made me a new one -
the second one. I couldn't find the first file.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Wilson Vandoyi for submitting the statement. As
we have already said, we would like as a Commission to meet with these
two witnesses and we will also try to investigate and to find out where
are the files for Dr Kahn so that we can get details.

	We'd like to thank you for bringing this forward. This is our chance to
try to continue with your case. We will try by all means to try and help
you with your case. Thank you.

	-------------------

