


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	30.10.1996			NAME: ALINA VILKAZI

CASE: 					 ALEXANDRA

DAY 3

_________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Good afternoon, Mrs Vilakazi. I am very pleased that you
could come. Can you hear me, is that all right?

MRS VILAKAZI: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Before you start giving your evidence, I would like to ask
if you could take the oath.

ALINA VILAKAZI: (Duly sworn, states).

CHAIRPERSON: I will ask Yasmin Sooka, the Commissioner, to lead your
evidence. Thank you.

MS SOOKA: Welcome, Mamma, to the Commission. Mamma, tell me about your
son, Abraham, what did he do before this incident happened to him. Tell
me a little bit about him and then tell me about what you know about what
happened.

MRS VILAKAZI: He was working. I went to the farm. When I came back I
found that he was shot and that he was in hospital. He stayed in hospital
for a long time and I thought he would recover but he died later on. He
left a son behind who was seven years old.

MS SOOKA: What did your son do and how old was he at the time that he was
shot?

MRS VILAKAZI: I don't know. I wasn't here. When I arrived I found him in
hospital. What I know is that he was working at one of the firms in town.

MS SOOKA: Do you know who shot him?

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	2	MRS VILAKAZI

MRS VILAKAZI: I don't know. I was told he was shot by police.

MS SOOKA: Do you know where he had been shot, Mamma?

MRS VILAKAZI: They said he was shot at Malborem.

MS SOOKA: Mamma, why do you think he was shot by the police? Did somebody
tell you that?

MRS VILAKAZI: Nobody told me as to why he was shot, even himself in
hospital he couldn't speak, so he couldn't tell as to what happened. I
was surprised, because when I left him he was well.

MS SOOKA: After he died was there any court case?

MRS VILAKAZI: No.

MS SOOKA: Mamma, was your son involved in any political organisations?

MRS VILAKAZI: No, he wast a very good child, well-behaved and he wasn't
involved in political activities.

MS SOOKA: Was anybody else shot at the same time as your son was shot? Do
you know?

MRS VILAKAZI: I don't know, I just discovered that he was shot. I don't
know anything more about his friends.

MS SOOKA: Is there anything else you would like to tell the Commission
before you finish your evidence?

MRS VILAKAZI: No, I have nothing, except what I have said.

MS MKHIZE: Listen carefully to me. I know that you were not there when
this incident occurred. However, if any great event happens, people
normally talk about it. Didn't you hear from rumours as to finding a clue
what happened at the time? This is going to help us in investigating the
case.

MRS VILAKAZI: I didn't find any clue or hear any rumours as to why he was
shot. I tried to call his friend and ask him as to what happened. He
didn't come and even when I went to

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	3	MRS VILAKAZI

the funeral the friend didn't come.

MS MKHIZE: This friend, is he a neighbour?

MRS VILAKAZI: He stayed in the township, but after he discovered that my
son was killed, he tried to distance himself from us, so we couldn't
reach him.

MS MKHIZE: At the time when you buried your son, the people who came to
comfort you, were they comrades?

MRS VILAKAZI: It was our family, his friends and friends of my children.

MS MKHIZE: The other friends which you mentioned, you said they came to
the funeral. After the funeral didn't you hear any rumours about the
incident?

MRS VILAKAZI: I didn't hear anything, because they don't want to tell me
the truth as to what happened.

MS MKHIZE: Thank you.

MS SEROKE: These friends, are they still around, many of his friends?

MRS VILAKAZI: Yes, two of them died.

MS SEROKE: The one that you mentioned, is he still around?

MRS VILAKAZI: No, he is not, he passed away. There were two friends, the
one of them he was working with and the other was working somewhere else.

MS SEROKE: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: The rest of your family, what other children do you have?

MRS VILAKAZI: I had four sons, one died, the one I am talking about. I am
left with four sons and have three daughters.

CHAIRPERSON: Is your husband still with you?

MRS VILAKAZI: My husband is still alive and we are staying together with
our grandchildren and our children.

ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

	4	MRS VILAKAZI

CHAIRPERSON: What we try and do in the Commission is to try and bring
some light to the story. But I think one of the most difficult things for
any of us to come to terms with, is not knowing. That is probably one of
the most difficult things to realise, is to feel the grief, to know that
someone has died, and not to know why, not to know the circumstances of
why they have died. We feel very much ...

MRS VILAKAZI: Can you please repeat the question? I don't know what you
mean? Do you mean the one who died?

CHAIRPERSON: (Indistinct - microphone not switched on) ... what we will
try and do as a Commission and how we feel. Because I think all of us
feel a great sense of grief with you, but a sense also of frustration,
because we can't help. We can't offer you any consolation in your grief.
Although we can understand it very much, because we have heard stories
like this, and we can understand particularly how difficult it is when
you don't know actually what happened. We salute you for your strength
and for your fortitude and thank you very much for coming to tell your
story, because it tells what was happening, it tells a story of what
happened here in those days not very long ago. Where we can help we will
try as much as we can to help, and we will come back to you with that.
Thank you very much for coming. Thank you.



	-------------











ALEXANDRA HEARING	TRC/GAUTENG

