
	1	N VUSANI

	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 27.08.96	NAME: NOZIPHO RINA VUSANI

CASE: UITENHAGE

DAY 2

__________________________________________________________CHAIRPERSON:
Our next witness is Nozipho Rina Vusani.

NOZIPHO RINA VUSANI: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: How are you Nozipho?

MS VUSANI: I am fine.

CHAIRPERSON: In your statement you are going to talk about your brother
Mgcineni Vusani who was shot on that particular day of the Langa
Massacre, whose body was found after two weeks, after searching and
searching since he left for the march to the funeral. Can you please
explain to us how old was he. Was he at school or was he working.

MS VUSANI: He was working, he was not at school. He was the only pillar
at home. My mother and father were not working. He was the only
breadwinner. He was working.

CHAIRPERSON: He indicated that he can be a real breadwinner permanently.
How did the whole thing affect you, his death?

MS VUSANI: It affected us most. During that time, my mother was not well,
and she suffered from a stroke. My father was also affected. In 1985
December, he died. Both parents died, my father died in 1990. It is only
me and my sister, there is no one who is working.

UITENHAGE HEARING	TRC/EASTERN CAPE

	2	N VUSANI

CHAIRPERSON: Was this Mgcineni the only brother?

MS VUSANI: No, we had other brothers, but he was the only one staying at
home. The other brothers were staying outside.

CHAIRPERSON: Who is responsible for your mother's treatment?

MS VUSANI: She passed away in 1985. It was for the first time that she
experienced this thing. We were from somewhere else, we had just
relocated to Uitenhage. It was very bad, it was tense. It was the very
first day that my brother had decided to go to a toyi toyi. Unfortunately
he was attacked.

CHAIRPERSON: What is your request as a family?

MS VUSANI: Because there is nobody who is working now, I request that the
Truth Commission do something, anything. CHAIRPERSON: In the Jubilee
Hall, was there any money that you received?

MS VUSANI: Yes, we got R4 000.

CHAIRPERSON: Is there anything else that you would like to add in your
statement?

MS VUSANI: I request that something should be done for us to help us
because we are not working, we are unemployed. Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: I am going to hand over and see if there are any other
questions. Thank you very much. We are going to adjourn now for lunch and
thereafter we are going to take the others who are still here from the
family victims.

COMMISSION ADJOURNS FOR LUNCH





