
	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	23-07-1996	NAME: VAYEKA PONNIE XABA

CASE: QUEENSTOWN

DAY 2



VAYEKA PONNIE XABA:	(sworn states)

REVD FINCA:	Ntsiki Sandi is going to lead you into the testimony.

MR SANDI:	Let me greet you Mr Xaba. If I understand this matter very
well, your presence here today before this Commission is about your son
Mthandazo who was shot on the 1st January 1992.

VP XABA:	Yes, that's true.

MR SANDI:	Now, Mr Xaba, I would like to question you about this matter
and make you talk freely and tell us the story we are about here today.
Before that, I would like to ask you to explain because as I was reading
this statement, I noticed that the cause was a conflict where you stay on
the use of camps where they were keeping stock.

	Now could you explain to me how were they doing it, how were they doing
these camps there in the locality?

VP XABA:	Thank you sir. Yes, this is the truth. We met as residents,
because there there are organisations and one of them is the ADM, so our
Headmen is a member of the ADM and we were members of the ANC.

	I was a ranger ... (intervention)

MR SANDI:	Excuse me for the interruption, I want to understand, you said
you came together as residents or did you come together as ANC members to
discuss about the use of these camps, and at the time you were a ranger?
If you were QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	2			VP XABA

to be asked therefor to explain what the role of a ranger is, would you
do it?

VP XABA:	A ranger is, when people are going to make use of a camp, they
come together and we agree and discuss about this.

	So there was this camp, a small one, that was going to be used for
keeping our cattle. This is a camp that is nearby, so we all agreed on
that.

MR SANDI:	And then, by the way you said when you met a Station Commander
came?

VP XABA:	Yes, that was when we had met as ANC members.

MR SANDI:	Did the Station Commander come, by whose invitation did he come?

VP XABA:	He was actually invited by the Headmen to go to the camp and the
camp was already in use at the time.

MR SANDI:	What did you say the name of the Headman was?

VP XABA:	He was, his name ...

MR SANDI:	In your statement you have said his name was Kehle.

VP XABA:	Yes, he was and he was supposed to be at the meeting.

MR SANDI:	Now, go on and tell us further what happened when the Station
Commander came to this meeting by the instruction f the Headmen.

VP XABA:	When the cattle were there in the camp - can I continue? When
the cattle were there in the camp, more cattle were brought into the camp
by children because this was according to the agreement.

	Then the ranger did not like this, the ranger of the ADM he decided to
go to the police.

MR SANDI:	During that conflict the youth came to join all

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	3			VP XABA

this, to support you? Was you son one of the people who came there? Could
you just tell us how it happened that your son was shot, Mthandazo?

VP XABA:	Mthandazo was a sheppard like most of the children, they were
keeping the cattle within the camp.

	Then a policeman came. The Station Commander was only driving a private
car. When this police heard what this people were saying, he decided to
withdraw and then he decided that he should go and talk about this, and
so that is when the Station Commander came and he said, no, he disarmed
the police and started shooting at the boys who were beyond the camp.

MR SANDI:	At that time, is it the time when Mthandazo was shot at?

VP XABA:	Yes, it was.

MR SANDI:	Now, did you say that Mthandazo died in hospital? Which
hospital was that?

VP XABA:	It was a hospital in East London.

MR SANDI:	Where were you when Mthandazo died?

VP XABA:	I was in East London already, they had called me and I thought
that he was seriously ill.

MR SANDI:	Were you arrested once in connection with the use of these
camps?

VP XABA:	Yes, the previous night I had been arrested, but that was before
I was called to East London. We were kept there but discharged the
following day.

	When I got home, I got the message that they wanted me in East London.

MR SANDI:	What did they want you for?

VP XABA:	Then they said it was my son who wanted me.

MR SANDI:	Do you mean they wanted you in the hospital?

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	4			VP XABA

VP XABA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Now, when you got there to the hospital, what did you find
there?

VP XABA:	When I got there, the Matron told me that my son had been
calling and talking about me and unfortunately he had passed away.

MR SANDI:	Is there anyone who was arrested or appear in court in
connection with the death of Mthandazo, your son?

VP XABA;	No, there never was any person.

MR SANDI:	Who exactly shot at mthandazo?

VP XABA:	It was the Station Commander.

MR SANDI:	Who is t by the way? What is his name?

VP XABA:	Siqombozo Jodo was, Siqombozo Jodo was his name.

MR SANDI:	Was there any post mortem conducted by the Doctors on
Mthandazo's body?

VP XABA:	Yes, when I was in East London I saw his body open where they
had shot him.

MR SANDI:	Is that all you have to say to us?

VP XABA:	Yes, but on the other hand, I am not through, because I buried
him in the absence of the Headmen and the policemen. I was then asked to
go to court.

MR SANDI:	What happened there in court?

VP XABA:	Siqombozo was there in court, because he was the one responsible
for the death of my son.

MR SANDI:	Was Siqombozo the accused? Was Siqombozo accused there in court?

VP XABA:	He had gone there, he was present on the day of the trial. I
just saw him coming and he just admitted that he was responsible for
killing my son.

MR SANDI:	Did he say this in court?

VP XABA:	Yes, he said this to the Magistrate.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	5			VP XABA

MR SANDI:	When you were burying him, how was the funeral?

VP XABA:	It was very good. It was full of ANC members.

MR SANDI:	Were there no disturbances on the day from the police?

VP XABA:	No, they were just present in guard of the Headmen of the ADM.
In fact they were at the Headmen's home.

MR SANDI:	At this point now, what is your request or your instruction to
the Commission?

VP XABA:	I am in great pain because I valued this child and he was still
at school and he was still going on.

	Now I would like the Commission to give me something substantial, even
the mother fell ill and died, she is no longer there, I am now the man
and wife in that home.

MR SANDI:	Before Mthandazo's mother died, you say she died of heart
attack?

VP XABA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Is there anything that she once said to you about what happened
to Mthandazo?

VP XABA:	In fact when we came back from court, that's when the mother
felt ill, because she felt her son had died like a dog and from that time
she was sick and she ultimately died because she had that complaint that
the son had died like a dog.

MR SANDI:	We thank you Mr Xaba. I'll now give you over to the Chairperson.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you Mr Sandi. Are there any other questions?

	Mr Xaba, I would like to ask you a question which may be difficult
because here as the Commission we have been instructed to look into
matters of conflict that are a result of politics.

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	6			VP XABA			

	In other words we are not just looking into ordinary conflicts amongst
residents.		

	Because if we were to do that, it would mean that we would sit and be
investigating for a very long time on these matters, now we want to know
the conflicts amongst the residents, how is it connected with politics?

VP XABA:	Why do you make this connection?

REVD FINCA:	Because it looks as if it was sort of a conflict over the
camps and the grazing land amongst the people in the location.

VP XABA:	Now why do you connect it to politics? I don't know whether I am
saying this clearly? Now could you explain this further to me?

REVD XUNDU:	What he is actually saying is there is a difference between
the conflicts between residents over things like camps.

VP XABA:	Now, how is this matter connected with politics?

REVD FINCA:	Were there clambering of some kind between these two
political organisations or it was just ordinary conflict of the residents
of a place over the use of camps?

VP XABA:	We were also confused, but because of the organisations we were
split ... (tape ends) (tape starts) ... organisations were introduced,
then we were split.

REVD FINCA:	Were you clambering over power?

VP XABA:	Yes, because ADM did not want to be under the ANC and we used to
say we were not actually in power, in stead we were dissatisfied about
certain things.

REVD FINCA:	Who had elected this Headman, was it the people in the
location?

VP XABA:	Yes, but he was taking sides.

REVD FINCA:	Did Mthandazo have any contributions towards

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	7			VP XABA

the political organisations? Did he occupy any position in the ANC?

VP XABA:	Yes, he was a member in the Youth League.

REVD FINCA:	Was he killed because he was a member?

VP XABA;	Yes, because he was an organiser.

REVD FINCA:	Thank you, unless there is another question. Ntsikelelo
Sandi, do you have perhaps another question?

MR SANDI:	Mr Xaba, I would like to ask you this question. You say the
organiser or the leader of the ADM was also a Headman named Kehle? Was
that in Ciskei in a place previously known as Ciskei or was it common
that Headmen were members of the ADM?

VP XABA:		In fact I should say the Headmen in any Government was the
leading person who would handle matters first and bring them to the
people.

	So the most important person was the Headmen. But you would find that he
was discriminatory, you would find that he had some people he liked and
some people he disliked.

MR SANDI:	Now I am referring to the time when Brigadier Gqozo used to
rule in Ciskei, was there a change in such a way that the Headmen became
organisers of the ADM?

VP XABA:	Yes, there was.

MR SANDI:	Now, do you mean that this led to the conflict between the
Headmen and the residents?

VP XABA:	Yes.

MR SANDI:	Thank you.

REVD FINCA:	Mr Xaba, we thank you.

	We are going to make a follow up according to the story you have given
to this Commission, so that those parts that are not very clear to us,
should be made clear to us.

	So people from this Commission will be visiting you as

QUEENSTOWN HEARING				TRC/EASTERN CAPE



	8

means to investigate and get more information, so we do not question you
because we don't understand your story, but we want to make a distinction
between the conflicts of the residents and those things that used to
happen long ago when we were enjoying life, before foreigners came into
our country.

	And even then there used to be some problems and we want to see whether
the conflict has been caused by the Apartheid that was supported by the
Governments of the TVBC States.

	So this is what we want to investigate, so that when we make a proposal
to the President, we should be very clear because we want to be in a
position to answer all the questions that are going to be posed to us.

	I will understand that this was a very difficult time here in this area,
we therefore thank you Mr Xaba.

	--------------------

