


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 25.03.1997			NAME: YALIWE MAGAWANA

DAY: 2					LUSIKISIKI

----------------------------------------------------------

YALIWE MAGAWANA: (sworn states)

ADV SANDI: You are going to talk about Douglas Magawana. How is Douglas
Magawana related to you?

MRS MAGAWANA: He was my husband.

ADV SANDI: He was also executed with Barnabas Magawana?

MRS MAGAWANA: Yes, six of them were executed. Douglas Magawana, Barnabas
Magawana, Horris Gamgula, Mamsat Thathaleka, Nqongela Majola Chucha. Six
men were executed in Pretoria.

ADV SANDI: Were they all accused of killing this one Chief?

MRS MAGAWANA: They said that because my husband joined Congo, Undlovu. He
then recruited other people. They would have meetings at Kanaga in Mziko
in the mountain. The Chief did not like this. He would pretend as if he
was going to join then, meanwhile he is taking their names down. 	Then
this one day, late in the afternoon someone came to me and said we should
not sleep at home. The Chief would come and kill my husband, his own
nephew was a leader of Congo. I am not going to say who he is.

	I locked my door. Somebody tried to kick it in. I asked my husband if he
could hear the noise. He said he is leaving. They forcefully entered our
house in the middle of the night. Dogs started to bark. I was at the
door. One of them said that one must speak.

	There was a knock. These men said that they were being attacked. They
were Congo members.

	I asked them why they were surrounding my house and standing by the
door. One of them said, they should not leave, the 'horse' was not there
yet.

	These men said that they are Congo members and that they have come with
the boers that belong to Congo.

	These men then ran.

	We sent a message to Barnabas that our house was being attacked.
Barnabas came the next morning and said that his wife must go home.

	The next morning they attacked Jajela.

	My husband was a member of Congo. They killed him. This attack was aimed
specifically at people who were Congo members

ADV SANDI: Did they have a legal representative?

MRS MAGAWANA: At the court of law there was an Attorney, Grant from
Bizana. We had to pay him. The men could not go. Women went. We gave him
whatever we could. We sold our cattle to pay the legal fees.

	When we asked the Attorney where our people were he said he does not
know. We saw them at Kokstad at the court case.

	Another representative, Rogers, was there. There is a man Mabula, who
would go and visit them, because we were not allowed to visit them. He
said that he had found an Attorney in Bizana.

	Grant said that we could proceed with Rogers.

	We do not know exactly what happened to our money. We were never given
receipts. You would just pay.

	After they were sentenced they were sent to Pretoria. 	When in Kokstad
the Attorney called us. There were three of them. Rogers called us, he
said he is taking this case to Grahamstown. We were given their
belongings.

	We realised that as they were giving us their clothing and their
belongings that they were going to be arrested or executed.

ADV SANDI: Did they write to you?

MRS MAGAWANA: Yes they did. A man who worked there McGowan, he would beat
them even when they were prosecuted.

	We never wanted to go again. We do not know what happened in Pretoria.
It is McGowan who knows what happened.

	They wrote letters.

ADV SANDI: What did the letters contain? How was the state of affairs
there?

MRS MAGAWANA: They revealed nothing in the letters.

At the end, when they started to divulge everything, telling us that they
were going to be executed. And feedback would come from Bizana.

	We were called to Bizana. We were in mourning. Each of us were asked
whether we wanted to stay in our houses where we stayed with our
husbands, or go back home. We all said we would stay.

	Nothing beyond that happened.

ADV SANDI: Is that all Mrs Magawana?

MRS MAGAWANA: I have given forward my requests that the bodies be exhumed
and that they be buried at home. We would like a tombstone to commemorate
our loved ones.

I would also like to see the perpetrators so that there

would be peace in my heart. I want them to tell me how they murdered my
husband. Some people were shot dead. Some people were stabbed to death. I
would like to know from their own mouths what happened to my husband.

	I also request from the Government that my children be educated. I have
a child. I went to a white man. Worked before him and he educated my
child for three years. He is now a teacher.

	The men that were sentenced to death, they disappeared. When they came
to my house for help it was clear that somebody was watching me and I
would be taken by the police. 	There is a document that they wanted. They
said it was with me. I denied. Eventually I burned the book.

	After they had taken my husband they burnt everything, my sewing
machine, my furniture. My child almost died in the flames. I crawled and
I pulled him out.

	I endeavoured to save my husband and I failed. I endeavoured to save my
child and I succeeded.

	I have a child who is in matric who will not be able to continue with
his education, because there is no money. 	I have a child who has
epileptic fits who had got injured at the same time. A bus was burnt down
and I got burnt on my head. This child with epileptic fits cannot go to
school properly like other children.

	I need a Death Certificate so that we can hang it on our wall so that he
passed away truly.

ADV SANDI: Thank you Mrs Magawane. You have enriched the picture about
people being executed. At the end the Chairperson will thank you
properly, after you have all

given evidence.

	-------------------





