				 	1				 L KADI	 	


	 	

TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	6TH MAY 19997		

NAME:	LILIAN T KADI

CASE:	JB3542				

HELD AT:	ZEERUST



____________________________________________________________________

CHAIRPERSON: Mr Pule arrived ? No. Lilian Kadi ? No. Can I ask Lekolobo
Segobodi to come to the stage.

L KADI: No.

CHAIRPERSON: Sorry ?

L KADI: My surname in Kladi, Kadi.

CHAIRPERSON: Welcome Lilian. Lilian you’ve come to tell us about
something that happened in 1993. I’m going to ask Professor Meiring to
help you with your oath and then Dr Ally is going to be helping you as
you tell your story. Professor Meiring ?

PROF. MEIRING: Miss Kadi, will you please stand and raise your hand into
the air. Will you please take the oath, saying, everything I say is the
truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth, so help me God.

LILIAN KADI: (sworn states)

DR ALLY: Lilian, welcome.

L KADI: Thank you.

DR ALLY: Thank you for coming. You’re coming to speak about a number of
incidents that happened to many members of your family and in particular
about Bennet Kadi. Events which take place over quite a long period,
beginning in 1993 and then extending right into 1994. So, if you could
please just go through what happened to your family and in particular to
Bennet. Thank you.

L KADI: It was on Thursday, at night, around 12 o’clock. Somebody came
and wake us up, saying people are crowded at the shop and they were
singing ANC slogans and they are looting at the restaurant and the
restaurant is burning. That’s why father walk up to that place. When he
arrived there he saw many people, therefore you couldn’t do anything. He
turned back and went to the police next to the Botswana border. He came
with the police.

	When they arrived there the shop was gutted. Then they went home whilst
those people are still there. They came home. They found the police there
and then the police shot them and they ran away, then the police were
coming in many instances and protecting. They would come for thirty
minutes and leave. After four days, it was during the day and my parents
were sitting under the tree, I was sleeping at that time, I could hear a
sound but I thought I was dreaming, then I slept again. Then I could hear
stone throwing. My parents ran away and went into the house and outside
were full of people holding ANC flags and placards and throwing stones
inside the house and the house was burning. We were sitting inside the
house not knowing what to do. The house was burning, the floor was
burning, the ceiling was burning and the ceiling was falling on the
ground. We would run to the rooms where there is no fire and later the
whole house was gutted to the ground. Not knowing what to do, we ran
outside the house and they were throwing, still throwing stones. A
certain boy came to help me. A certain one came with a spear then he
tried to stab me but the boy who helped me, protected me. I was hit with
stones and some of my teeth were removed, my two siblings were able to
run away.

	In the house was my father and my uncle and inside they were burnt by
that fire, then they ran out, then my father wanted to jump the fence. A
certain boy came with a spade and slapped him and then he fell on the
ground. He was pulled outside but my uncle was able to run for a
distance. After that he was caught and there was a container of diesel,
they were put just next to that container and they were slapped with
those spades. They took tyres which were outside and put them on their
neck and they were burnt.

	After that the police came after three hours they were taken and all of
us, together with my, with my brother, we were taken to the hospital.
They took my father and my uncle to the mortuary. The police came after
two weeks to take the statement. From there we submitted our statement,
then we went to court but we were not informed to come to court, but I
went to the police station to ask them, why did they take statements and
they don’t want us to come to court, but the police said they were afraid
of the confusion because those people would come, so they were waiting
for come. The court case proceeded. Those people who were arrested, were
given bail, because we gave them names of people who were leaders. Even
up to-day, we didn’t go, the court case didn’t proceed. Even when, even
to-day, they still say, they are still investigating about those people.

DR ALLY: Lilian, just to get something straight. Your father was not the
only one that was killed in this incident, your uncle was also killed,
also burnt ?

L KADI: Yes, both of them died.

DR ALLY: J Kadi, what was his name, the name of your uncle ?

L KADI: The one who died ? His name is Justice Kadi.

DR ALLY: And he was your father’s brother and this ... ?

L KADI: That’s true.

DR ALLY: Has anybody besides you made at statement about your late uncle,
Mr Justice Kadi, other family members ?

L KADI: That’s myself only and my brother.

DR ALLY: You also mention your, a brother, and what happened to him ? He
was eight years old at the time, your younger brother?

L KADI: He was eight years at that time.

DR ALLY: And what did happen to him, because you put him down as, as... ?

L KADI: He lost some teeth because we were hit with stones and we had,
both me and him, we had just injuries.

DR ALLY: And another sister, a younger sister as well ?

L KADI: That’s myself and my brother.

DR ALLY: Now can you tell us a little bit about your father the late
Bennet Kadi because you speak in your statement about his political
activities, maybe you can just tell us a little bit more ?

L KADI: I only know that my father was a member of parliament and that’s
nothing more I know about his political activity.

DR ALLY: He was a member of parliament in Mangope’s government, Chief
Mangope’s government?

L KADI: Yes, that’s true.

DR ALLY: And you don’t know for how long or when he became a member of
parliament. You don’t know, do you know any of those details ?

L KADI: He started to be a member of parliament in the inception of the
Boputhatswana government.

DR ALLY: In 77, since 1977?

L KADI: That’s true.

DR ALLY: Was he just a member of parliament or did he have, do you know
if he, if he was ever in the cabinet or did he have any other senior
position ?

L KADI: He was just and honorary member of parliament.

DR ALLY: And your father was also a businessman, not so ?

L KADI: Yes, he was a businessman.

DR ALLY: What businesses did he have ?

L KADI: He had two shops.

DR ALLY: There’s conflict because you say that the people who came to
your house on that particular day, that they were, that you said that
were shouting ANC slogans did you say that?

L KADI: That’s true, I said that.

DR ALLY: And did they have any ANC T-shirts or flags or anything, or was
it just that they were shouting ANC slogans ?

L KADI: They were having ANC placards and ANC flags.

DR ALLY: These slogans, can you remember, can you tell us, give us an
example of one of the slogans which was shouted ?

L KADI: No, I cannot give you an example.

DR ALLY: Now, before this, this incident where your house was attacked
and burnt were there any other clashes between your father and members of
the village people, who you say, who you think belonged to the ANC ?

L KADI: There was no conflict between my father and the local residents,
but some members of the ANC, yes.

DR ALLY: Now can you tell us about this, give us examples of this ?

L KADI: They to our house, you know, passing and then they would shout
and say, he has built a big house with the government’s money and that
they’re going to use that house to be an ANC office.

DR ALLY: And your father, did he ever speak about what was happening ?
Did he ever speak to you about what was happening ?

L KADI: No, he was not communicating with us about that, in that regard.

DR ALLY: And your mother at the time, where was she ?

L KADI: Do you mean the time when they were burnt ?

DR ALLY: That you’re speaking about, where was your mother ?

L KADI: No, he was not communicating with us in that regard Sir.

DR ALLY: But you say that the funeral that you organised, was very
difficult because you said you were, that you were threatened all the
time, can you tell us a bit about that, about the actual funeral of your
father, where it took place and how it was organised ?

L KADI: There were no people who were coming to assist us with the
preparations. I was the only one who was running around looking for
money, looking for caskets, looking for beasts and looking for groceries
and that those people who would come to the funeral would have something
to eat but there was nobody who was helping me even about the
preparations.

DR ALLY: You also say that you were harassed and that you were threatened
during the time that you were trying to organise the funeral. Can you
tell us about that ?

L KADI: They were telling us after we have buried the corpses they would
exhume it and put it in front of our house.

DR ALLY: You say you did all of this on your own. You don’t mention your
mother at all in, in your statement. Can you, can you tell ... (tape
ended)

L KADI: My mother is staying at Vet Luigat and I’m staying with my two
siblings at, locally here and they are schooling at Mmabatho.

DR ALLY: These people who you mentioned as the people responsible, at
least the people who were part of that group, do you ever, do you see
them, do you interact with them ?

L KADI: I don’t go to that Luigat which means I’ve no way of meeting with
them, so I haven’t met them since.

DR ALLY: Since that incident, since that night of 1994 you’ve never had
contact with them again?

L KADI: No, I didn’t even meet one of them.

DR ALLY: Thank you very much for coming to speak to us about something
that is obviously very, very painful, to lose a parent is hard enough but
to lose a parent under those circumstances with the horrific burning that
you, that you describe and to witness something like that, so thank you,
thank you very much for coming to speak to us. I’ll give you back to the
Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: Miss Seroke.

MISS SEROKE: You say, your mother is staying at Vet Luigat ?

L KADI: That’s true.

MISS SEROKE: Did you rebuild that house ?

L KADI: Yes, we did rebuild the house.

MISS SEROKE: So you’re still, you’re still in the same house ?

L KADI: Yes, we’re still in the same house.

MISS SEROKE: Was it gutted to the ground?

L KADI: Yes, it was burnt to the ground.

MISS SEROKE: So you started from the foundation?

L KADI: Yes, we did.

MISS SEROKE: Where are you working?

L KADI: I’m working at Standard Bank in Lefurutsi.

MISS SEROKE: Your siblings, what standard are they doing ?

L KADI: Two of them are not attending school, one is doing standard ten,
the other one standard nine, the other one standard six.

MISS SEROKE: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Professor Meiring.

PROF. MEIRING: Miss Lilian, thank you for coming and it must have been
very difficult to tell your story. I’ll be very brief with my questions.
The one question is, after the horrible thing that happened to your
family, did you or your younger brother and sister or your mother
underwent any form of counselling ? Did people treat you psychologically
for what happened ?

L KADI: No, we didn’t, we didn’t meet the psychologist Sir.

PROF. MEIRING: Would you like that ? Is that a need in the family?

L KADI: Definitely, I say it is a need.

PROF. MEIRING: Thank you, I also see in your statement that you feel that
there’s no tombstone on your father’s grave, is that correct ?

L KADI: That’s true.

PROF. MEIRING: And then there’s also the matter of the insurance policies
that have not been paid out and you need help with that?

L KADI: That’s true.

PROF. MEIRING: Thank you. There’s a last thing that I would just like to
mention. You say in your statement that you are prepared to meet with the
perpetrators of this deed, it they are willing to meet with you and
explain what happened., is that still the case ? Are you still willing to
meet with the perpetrators ?

L KADI: Yes, I’m prepared to meet with them.

PROF. MEIRING: Thank you very much.

CHAIRPERSON: Lilian, just one question. I heard you say that you’ve out
of the village but your mother still lives in the village, now you said
to Professor Meiring that you’d be willing to meet up with the
perpetrators.

L KADI: That’s true.

CHAIRPERSON: After all these years, how do you actually feel about what
happened ?

L KADI: They de-stopped our lives, because we could have gone to school.
Now we don’t have somebody responsible who can help us further our
studies. I was, I couldn’t have been working, I could have been at school
now.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Lilian. Lilian, I’m sure it’s - coming here and
telling your story to-day, is extremely painful. This happened four or
five years ago and I just want to echo what Dr Ally said, that this was a
horrific killing almost at the time that we were about to move into a
democratic South Africa as you’ve said in your statement yourself. I hope
that coming here to-day has helped in some way and that the questions
that Professor Meiring has asked you, that some help will be provided.
Thank you very much for coming.



					-----------------------------

