				 	1					 	




				 	

TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	6TH MAY 1997		

NAME:	JOHANNA M MOITOI

CASE:	JB3682				

HELD AT:	ZEERUST



________________________________________________________________________

MRS MOITOI: (sworn states)

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Professor Meiring.

PROF. MEIRING: Mrs Moitoi, welcome again. We are very happy to have you
and we are privileged to listen to your story. It again takes us back to
April 1989, when you underwent a very harrowing experience. Would you
like to tell us in your own words, what happened on that day and
afterwards.

MRS MOITOI: Thanking you for welcoming me. Iím your child Johanna Moitoi.
Boputhatswana soldiers came forcing us to accept whatever they do and
whatever they say. They were not bringing peace or, with humility but
they were fighting. When they arrived at my house they said to me, we are
coming to take you. They were about twelve in number but all of them were
men. When they arrived at home, I was with my friend, my fianc…. He asked
them what are they taking me for ? Then they said, they said I will...
They did that, they assaulted me and burnt me on my hands. I was burnt on
both hands. Let me show you my scars because this is a memory to me. Then
I just gave up and allowed then to burn me because I said whatever they
want me to do, I will do, then we boarded the police van to a certain man
called Mita Sigwilwa. Thatís where they build - tents there.

	We were taken by a police van to Motswele. We were assaulted by them. I
was with Joyce Modise. They didnít accept anything which we said, but
they wanted us to accept anything they say. They said to me, whoís your
Chief ? I told them that I was given, been commissioned that Mr Sebogodi
was my Chief. Then they told me that he, he is no more a Chief, that the
Chief is now Adrian Weelwa, but I did not accept that because everything
which happens in a community, that should be have been informed that our
Chief is now Weelwa. I was assaulted because my Chief is Mr Sebogodi.
Even now, the Chief is Papsi Sebogodi. I didnít know anything, any
information that Mr Weelwa is the Chief. Being assaulted by the soldiers
and the police was, was that the - say but belief, that I should believe
what they say but I continued with my convictions.

	I was taken to Motswele. I arrived in a group of police and they, we
were assaulted because we, they wanted us to say that Adrian Weelwa is
our Chief and believe, accept that our land should be amalgamated to
Boputhatswana. I didnít know, I didnít know of any importance that we
should be amalgamated to Boputhatswana. Feel that their government was
oppressive and assaulting people. We couldnít accept Boputhatswana
because we were beaten. Whilst we were at Motswele my fianc… came but he
was told that Iím going to stay in prison for five years, so he accepted
that, then I accepted that also.

	After, after a while, after eight oíclock, after I was, itís been told
that the - why I was there, then I was taken back home by the police van.
I didnít appear in court and thatís what I said that, but I was assaulted.

PROF. MEIRING: Thank you very much for telling the story. Can I just
start at the beginning again. Where were you working before, on the day,
during the time when they arrested you?

MRS MOITOI: I was having a one year seven months child. I was still at
maternity leave.

PROF. MEIRING: But you, didnít you work with the local ........
(interrupted) You said that, in your statement you said that you worked
at the local authority and that the people wanted you to make a statement
that the money was misused by the local authority. Is that so ?

MRS MOITOI: They didnít understand what I was saying. If we were at the
village, we were asked to collect money to build an office where
pensioners would receive their pension, but I was not receiving any
re-imbursement.

PROF. MEIRING: So that was the reason why, that was what they wanted you
to say. In your statement you say that when you were arrested, you
together with five other people were taken to a tent and horrible things
were done to you then. Would you like to tell us about that, or do you
prefer not to tell us about that ?

MRS MOITOI: Being burnt while, whilst your looking, being burnt with fire
whilst you were looking.

PROF. MEIRING: In the statement, in the written statement thereís also
mention of a device that was put between your legs, that you were
shocked. Would you like to tell about that, or is it not important to
tell it here.

MRS MOITOI: Itís too - Iím ashamed to talk about that.

PROF. MEIRING: Itís on paper and we have it. Thank you for that. Another,
another very terrible thing that happened was that your sister was so
shocked when she heard about your arrest that she fell, she collapsed and
she died of shock. Would you like to tell about that ?

MRS MOITOI: Thatís my sister, thatís my sister, thatís Lydia Moitoi who
has since died.

PROF. MEIRING: As the result of your being arrested.

MRS MOITOI: He died of, he died of a heart attack. He didnít have this
heart problem before.

PROF. MEIRING: Thank you Mrs Moitoi. Only a few questions more. You
talked about your fianc…. After you were free to go did you marry ?

MRS MOITOI: We didnít marry, even now.

PROF. MEIRING: Children you have to take care of ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes there are children whom Iím taking care of.

PROF. MEIRING: How many children ?

MRS MOITOI: Four children.

PROF. MEIRING: How old are they ?

MRS MOITOI: The firstborn is, was born in 1978. Heís doing standard
eight. The second born is doing standard seven. He was born in 1979. The
third one is doing standard six, was born in 1982. Of the one whom I was
pregnant with, was born in 1987 and heís doing standard two.

PROF. MEIRING: You are working at the moment as a sales lady in Zeerust?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, Iím working at a shop.

PROF. MEIRING: I just want to one ask one more question and then Iíll
pass onto my colleagues. What happened to you, that you, being a lady was
arrested and brutalised. Did that happen very often ? Were there many
women who suffered from the Boputhatswana police ? What happened to you
was very bad, youíre a lady, youíre a woman and you were assaulted by the
police. Were there many other women that were assaulted similarly ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, there were, there were many.

PROF. MEIRING: Thank you very much. No more questions from my side.

DR ALLY: If I can ask one or two questions please. Your statement says
that you were accused of burning down houses. Why would they make that
kind of accusation against you ?

MRS MOITOI: They were just forcing you know, those kind of statements to
me. It was because of the oppressive attitude that they had at that time.

DR ALLY: Were there houses that were burnt down in the area, in this
village Lukubo ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, many houses were burnt during that time.

DR ALLY: And you politically, do you, did you have, were you, were you
politically active in any way ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, I was a member of African National Congress.

DR ALLY: This is in 1989 ?

MRS MOITOI: Thatís true.

DR ALLY: African National Congress was still banned at that point. In
fact even after 1989 in the Bop area they continued to outlaw the ANC. So
when you say youíre a member of the ANC in 1989, what do you mean ?

MRS MOITOI: I worked, I worked with them, from them, until now because
they supported me all the time.

DR ALLY: So you mean, are you saying in 1989 were you a member of the ANC
or were you just generally supportive of the policy of the ANC, or were
you an actual member of any ANC structures, the ANC underground, in 1989 ?

MRS MOITOI: I was member of the ANC which was, which was public then. It
was not underground then. I have their membership cards with me.

DR ALLY: Then we were speaking about after 1989 because the ANC was only
unbanned in February 1990. So weíre speaking about after 1989, but at the
time 1989, where you known to be politically outspoken, why would they
have come and picked you up in particular and accused you and tortured
you ? What reason would they have had?

MRS MOITOI: They wanted me to force me to be a member of Boputhatswana,
but when I denied, they said, which means you are part of those people
who are burning houses.

DR ALLY: But Iím still trying to understand now, I hope you donít mind.
That was when they actually had already picked you up, not so, that they
tried to force you to make a false statement. That was after they picked
you up, but what Iím trying to understand, why would they have gone to
you in particular, before you were picked up, why would they have singled
you out to be, to be, to be picked up. Did you have a - were you known to
be a political activist ? Had you spoken out against certain things ?
Were you friendly with people who were considered to be political
activists ? Why, why would they have gone for you ? Thatís what I could
try to understand.

MRS MOITOI: When they came to me they came to me with a person whom we
were elected together to collect money, which means, they came with
somebody who knew where I was staying.

DR ALLY: The money that you were collecting this was for, this was for a
pension fund, but you were accused of collecting for other purposes ?

MRS MOITOI: We were collecting two rands from each person or each house.

DR ALLY: In your village ?

MRS MOITOI: Thatís true. In our area.

DR ALLY: And this money was going to be used for what purpose ?

MRS MOITOI: We wanted to build a hall with that money so that when they
received their pension, their pension grants, theyíd be able to gather
there, when the government agencies come to give them their pensions.

DR ALLY: Special, was there a special committee that was appointed to
collect this money ? Is that, is that how it worked or ... ?

MRS MOITOI: Thatís true.

DR ALLY: And this committee had a treasurer and, and proper records were
kept and everything like that. Is that how it worked ?

MRS MOITOI: Thatís true.

DR ALLY: Now, the person who came with the police, was the, was also part
of this committee collecting this money ? Yes ?

MRS MOITOI: Thatís true.

DR ALLY: Now what. Did this person, did this person give the police false
information or what what was going on ?

MRS MOITOI: I didnít know how they approached her or him, but to me they
came, because he was directing the police to my house, but he left in the
police van and the police came on their own.

DR ALLY: Was this person also tortured or any, anything happen to this
person ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, he was tortured.

DR ALLY: Thank you very much.

MRS MOITOI: Thank you, Sir.

MISS SEROKE: When you were testifying, you said, you were under Chief
Sebogodi.

MRS MOITOI: Yes, thatís true.

MISS SEROKE: You didnít know that Mr Moilo is now the Chief of your area.

MRS MOITOI: Yes, thatís true.

MISS SEROKE: What were the stands of Chief Sebogodi ?

MRS MOITOI: We took him, we regarded him as our Chief, as we knew that,
that he, he was our Chief.

MISS SEROKE: When they came to you, they saw you because you were
collecting monies from people. Were they young people or was it the whole
community ?

MRS MOITOI: As we said we were the youth, we had our book and the old
people had their own book.

MISS SEROKE: When they did what you donít want to tell us about, did you
go to the police to report what they did to you ?

MRS MOITOI: I didnít even dare try because I still going to appear to the
same people.

MISS SEROKE: Did you tell the doctor what they did to you ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, I did explain to the doctor and when I came back, I
found the road block, then they teared up those papers.

MISS SEROKE: Thank you.

CHAIRPERSON: Johanna, sorry, just a few more questions and then weíre
finished. I just want to understand your perspective of what was going on
between Chief Sebogodi and Chief Molilwa.

MRS MOITOI: Repeat your question, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: Conflict that was taking place in the area at the time.

MRS MOITOI: The conflict was brought about by the police because they
said to us Adrian Molilwa is the Chief and we as a community, we didnít
know that Adrian Molilwa was the Chief. We know that when a new Chief is
introduced, the whole community is invited to be informed about that, but
I knew that, at that time the Chief was LM Sebogodi. Then I was even
given a third tale about the history of Sebogodi, then I knew that
Sebogodi was the Chief and I, there was no way in which I couldnít
understand that he was the Chief. I told them straight in their faces
that Sebogodi is the Chief of Legobo village.

CHAIRPERSON: And the association between incorporation of the area into
Boputhatswana was that, did that feature in this whole discussion that
youíre talking about now ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, it did surface.

CHAIRPERSON: The Chief was against, Chief Sebogodi was against
incorporation whereas the other Chief seemed happy to go along with it ?

MRS MOITOI: I would say, Chief Molilwa, yes, agreed, because all meetings
were held in his place, so which means he agreed that we should be
incorporated.

CHAIRPERSON: And you said earlier on that there were many houses that
were burnt down. Whose houses were being burnt down, and by whom ? Were
they supporters of one faction against, or another faction, or was it
police officers whose houses were being burnt down ?

MRS MOITOI: The house, I understand about the incidents, was the house
belonging to Mr Selomi, when they inspected the damage it was found that
it was the police who did that.

CHAIRPERSON: My last question is to do with the, this collection of money
that you were, that you were involved in for the hall. Was that purely on
a voluntary basis ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, I volunteered because after seeing the suffering of old
age people, because they were staying in the sun and in the rain.

CHAIRPERSON: Thatís part of it but the actual collecting of money from
other people, did they also offer the money voluntarily ?

MRS MOITOI: Yes, they were volunteering in their contributions.

CHAIRPERSON: Now that brings to the end all the questioning. Is there
anything else you would like to say ?

MRS MOITOI: You meant to continue ?

CHAIRPERSON: If thereís anything else that you want to add to whatís been
said already.

MRS MOITOI: To continue, I would wish that those people who did all, who
were victims as myself, their names should appear and that they should be
taken care of by the Truth Commission.

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Johanna. I just want to thank you for coming here
to-day. Please donít feel that all these questions that weíve been posing
you is to make life more difficult to you. Itís just that we want to
understand the context in which it took place. It doesnít take away what
happened to you, both at the camp and at the police station and we thank
you to-day for coming and sharing those experiences with us and we hear
what youíve said in terms of the needs of victims to be recognised. Thank
you very much.

MRS MOITOI: Thank you, Sir.

CHAIRPERSON: I said I would keep people informed about statement taking.
There are people at the back of the hall who are taking statements and if
you want to have a statement taken, please, if youíll proceed to the back
of the hall. Thank you very much.

---------------------------------------

