


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE: 25.03.1997		NAME: NOSIPO DOROTHEA ZOMDIZELA

DAY: 2				LUSIKISIKI

----------------------------------------------------------

MS CRICHTON: Can you hear me Mrs Somdizela?

NOSIPO DOROTHEAA ZOMDIZELA SOMDIZELA: Yes I can hear you.

MS CRICHTON: You are here to speak about your husband. What was his name?

MS SOMDIZELA: He was Skinkili Moyiswa.

MS CRICHTON: Was he a member of Congo?

MS SOMDIZELA: Yes.

MS CRICHTON: He was also detained at Timkambati. Is that right?

MS SOMDIZELA: Yes, that is correct.

MS CRICHTON: And other places as well?

MS SOMDIZELA: Yes at Timkambati.

MS CRICHTON: Will you tell me what his condition was when he was released.

MS SOMDIZELA: He was sick. His whole body was swollen

and he had wounds all over his body. He would fall down and he would tell
us that he was electrocuted. And his mind was not well. We would take him
to the hospital and his whole body was suffering. He had wounds on his
legs. He was detained twice. The second time he was taken to Richmond.

MS CRICHTON: How many children do you have with your husband.

MS SOMDIZELA: There were nine then, but now there are six.

MS CRICHTON: Have you another request to the Commission?

MS SOMDIZELA: Yes I do have a request. My children are fatherless. I
would like the Government to help me to educate my children and to feed
them. Secondly I would requested that if you can build a clinic in our
village. We would appreciate that.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you Mrs Somdizela. Is that all you wish to say?

MS SOMDIZELA: Yes, that is all.

MS CRICHTON: Thank you Mr Chairperson.

MS SOMDIZELA: Thank you.

CHAIRMAN: Thank you. You may go back to your seats.

	I would like all the people who gave evidence this morning to stand up
so that we can thank all of them.

	On behalf of the Commission we would like to thank you. You have a lot
of dignity, calm words that you have spoken with no anger or bitterness.
Your strength, incredible strength. Since we started working in this area
we have never seen such strength. You have given us a picture that you
have been tortured, have been oppressed and injured. Some of you lost
family members, members of your families died in the hands of the
National Party.

	We have a picture in our minds that we will never forget. A picture that
you went through a lot of pain but that you are here with no bitterness.
You are not talking about things that you heard that happened, just
stories, but you were talking about your lives. Things that happened to
your spouses, your families, but when you sat here and you gave evidence
in connection with your relatives, some of you have been left as orphans.

	We did not see a single tear. There was dignity all the way. Strength
that we have never come across.

	We have heard your requests. Some are personal and others are for the
Pondo people. Some are requesting schools, clinics, roads. After you lost
family members you are not thinking about yourselves, but you are
thinking about the Pondo people as a whole.

	We salute you as the Commission!

	We will take your requests to the Government. It moved us deeply. For us
to find out that the Government that was oppressive to you you could not
even report, because you were too scared. We trust that the present
Government will change that idea of the Government. We hope that the
present Government will be of service to you.

	And if the Government treated people in an ill manner then the people
have the right to report. This previous regime said that they relied on
the Bible. It is an enigma.

	You may sit down. Thank you very much.

	We are going to call the people whose family members were executed:
Agness Mamsareni Magawana; Daliwe Mgulwa; Mapota Peter Mjanyelwa;
Gingiliza Mamsakazweni Mkhathi and Matshingelana Cambana.

	Mr Magawana has not made a statement, but we will request him to come
up, because apparently he is of the same group. After he has given
evidence would he please give a statement, because the most important
thing to the Commission is a statement that is documented.











