	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION


	TRUTH AND RECONCILIATION COMMISSION

	HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

	SUBMISSIONS - QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

DATE:	13 JUNE 1997	

NAME: 	TRAYISHILE SAMUEL ZWELIBANZI

	 	NOSISI FLORENCE GIYA

CASE:		EC0112/06ELN		-	MDANTSANE

DAY:		5

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------- CHAIRPERSON: Is Mrs Gwadi here. Our last
witness, Samuel Zwelibanzi. Trayishile, please stand up.

TRAYISHILE SAMUEL ZWELIBANZI: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Who is the lady next to you?

MR ZWELIBANZI: She is my sister.

CHAIRPERSON: Is she going to testify?

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes.

CHAIRPERSON: Her full names.

MRS GIYA: Nosisi Florence Giya.

CHAIRPERSON: Nosisi?

MRS GIYA: Florence Giya.

CHAIRPERSON: Florence. Your surname?

MRS GIYA: Giya.

CHAIRPERSON: Giya.

NOSISI FLORENCE GIYA: (Duly sworn in, states).

CHAIRPERSON: Thank you Mam. I will hand over to Tiny. She will lead you
with questions on behalf of the Commission.

MS MAYA: Thank you Chairperson. Mr Zwelibanzi, you are here to tell us
about what happened to you especially in 1984. You said that you were
arrested and you were tortured. The police forced you to confess to the
murder of a policeman by the name of Noko. Is that correct?

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes, that is correct.

MS MAYA: At that time were you a member of any political organisation?

MR ZWELIBANZI: No, I was not.

MS MAYA: Why were you being accused of murdering this policeman?

MR ZWELIBANZI: I do not know why.

MS MAYA: In your statement you said that Noko's son pointed you as the
person who killed his father.

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes.

MS MAYA: Did you know the late Noko's son?

MR ZWELIBANZI: No.

MS MAYA: Why was he pointing you?

MR ZWELIBANZI: I do not know.

MS MAYA: The police, did you know him?

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes, I knew him.

MS MAYA: Did you know how he was killed?

MR ZWELIBANZI: No, I did not know.

MS MAYA: Is there any reason why you were associated with Mr Noko's
murder?

MR ZWELIBANZI: No, there is no reason.

MS MAYA: You say that you were arrested and you were tortured. Who
arrested you and who tortured you where?

MR ZWELIBANZI: I was arrested by Baleni, Feliti, Kota and Mkhuseli. These
are the Ciskeian Police.

MS MAYA: What did they do to you?

MR ZWELIBANZI: They tortured me.

MS MAYA: How?

MR ZWELIBANZI: They tortured me in different ways. They put a tube in my
face, they put me in the water. Everything was done to me.

MS MAYA: Where were they torturing you?

MR ZWELIBANZI: At Tamara Police Station?

MS MAYA: The people you mentioned do you know exactly who did these
things to you?

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes.

MS MAYA: Please explain to us.

MR ZWELIBANZI: Baleni took me from hospital. They, Mkhuseli tied my hands
and my legs. Feliti and Kota took a tube and they placed the tube in my
face. I became unconscious and I regained consciousness in a prison cell.
They poured water all over me.

MS MAYA: For how long were you tortured?

MR ZWELIBANZI: For two years. I was in Tamara Police Station and they
were torturing me.

MS MAYA: Did you appear in the Court of Law?

MR ZWELIBANZI: Because I admitted to the killing I appeared in the
Supreme Court.

MS MAYA: What happened?

MR ZWELIBANZI: I was, the case was dismissed.

MS MAYA: Did you know exactly why were you arrested? Why were you accused
of murdering this police?

MR ZWELIBANZI: No, the reason why I admitted to this killing is because
they were torturing me. They said that if I do not admit to the killing
they will destroy my family members. They said that I was from Lesotho. I
said that I was in Johannesburg, not in Lesotho. They accused me of lying
saying that I came from Lesotho. I told them that I was in Johannesburg,
not in Lesotho. I stayed in Bree Street in Johannesburg. Noko family then
pointed me as the person who killed this policeman. They said that they
are going to destroy my family members, because they were not going to,
they said they were not going to allow terrorists in this area. They went
to fetch my mother. Baleni took me from the prison cell to show me my
mother. My mother was in that cell. She was naked. There was blood all
over that prison cell. I then admitted to the killing.

MS MAYA: Mr Zwelibanzi, you said that your mother was arrested and you
found blood in her police, in her cell.

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes, she was assaulted.

MS MAYA: How old was your mother?

MR ZWELIBANZI: My mother was very old. I was a last born at home so I am
not sure about her age, but if I can count I think she was born 1910 or
1912. She was above 18.

MS MAYA: When was she released?

MR ZWELIBANZI: She was released after I admitted to the killing.

MS MAYA: For how long was she arrested?

MR ZWELIBANZI: I do not know, because when I saw her it was clear that
she spent a lot of time there. I then decided to admit to the killing.

MS MAYA: Did you know the people who tortured your mother?

MR ZWELIBANZI: It was Baleni, Baleni, Kota, Feliti. Baleni was the most
dangerous.

MS MAYA: How was your mother's health after her release?

MR ZWELIBANZI: My mother would be admitted in hospital now and again.
There are documents or we have a file and Mr Hinza Siwisa has this
document. My mother's name was Nolonso Sibawsa, Nolonso Zwelibanzi.

MS MAYA: When did she die?

MR ZWELIBANZI: I am not sure, but the death certificate is with you.

MS MAYA: Let us conclude Sir. Can you please tell us how this affected
your health.

MR ZWELIBANZI: My doctor, Dr Agwala in Cecilia Hospital said that my
veins in my head are damaged and I am waiting for a sick pension. I have
a wife and children. I have to support them, but I cannot do anything for
them.

MS MAYA: Before I ask your requests let me ask your sister whether she
has got anything to add.

MRS GIYA: Thank you Chairperson. What I would like to add to what my
brother has already said is that we suffered a lot. My mother was
arrested, my mother was staying with my daughter and my brother's
girlfriend. The girlfriend was pregnant at the time. A child came at home
saying that the police have arrested my mother and this child was also
assaulted by the police. The child was injured. Again the police came and
they took my son, Amos Giya. They assaulted him. As a result of that he
would, he is mentally disturbed. He would go to Makiwane Hospital now and
again. I tried to go and visit my home. The neighbour said that the
police do not want anybody in that house.

	I went to Hinza to report this matter. He told me to go back to my
house, because the police would come and arrest me. There was no peace.
The cars, police cars would come around. After two months I tried to go
back home. When I got home it was not locked. The furniture was not
there. The house was empty.

MS MAYA: Excuse me Mrs Giya. I do not want to disturb you, but we do not
have a statement about the people you just mentioned. We have a statement
about Trayishile Zwelibanzi. If that is all about him we would like to
stop there. If you have a wish to submit statements you can go to our
office to submit your statements.

MRS GIYA: Can I continue with the case of my mother?

MS MAYA: You can continue with the request, because Trayishile has
already told us what happened to your mother.

MRS GIYA: We have no home now. Trayishile is not well. They are not
staying at my home. Trayishile has epileptic fits. He cannot work for
himself. He cannot even support his family. I would like to make this
request concerning this family. I requested to come here to be with him
so that I can support him. Since he was released from prison he suffered
from epileptic fits.

MS MAYA: Thank you Mam. Let us now go back to Trayishile. Trayishile, you
have requests here. You requested you would like to know the real truth
behind the imprisonment.

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes.

MS MAYA: You would also like to be trained so that you can work for
yourself.

MR ZWELIBANZI: Yes, that is correct.

MS MAYA: Thank you for your testimony. I will hand over to the
Chairperson.

CHAIRPERSON: We thank both of you for appearing before the Commission.
Your sister decided to come and support you and we thank her for that. We
have noted the requests you have made before the Commission. We will
forward them to the President of the country together with his Cabinet.
As you are the last people I would like you to stay there and give me a
minute so that I can thank everybody here.

	First of all I would like to thank people from Mdantsane. I never saw
this kind of commitment before. Yesterday you were here and we heard from
the radio that people from Mdantsane stayed from 11 until four when we
had a problem with electricity. People wanted this hearing to continue.
Today it is very cold in this area, but despite that you came to listen
to the witnesses who are going to testify before the Commission. It is
our last hearing. In other places if it was cold people would not come
and attend. It will be only ourselves, staff members and the witnesses,
but in this hall there are a lot of people attending today. I would like
to thank people from Mdanstane, the way you supported this hearing.

	The TRC started its job in this region in the service, in the Assembles
Church. At the time it was not clear whether the TRC would be supported
by the people or not, but people from Mdantsane attended and supported
that hearing and it was a success. I would like to thank you for
supporting us. I would like to thank the people who gave us this hall and
the owner of the hotel. We thank the way they treated us. This hall today
was booked for another event, but they gave us the hall so that we can
finish our hearing with dignity. Again, I would like to thank the police.
I do not know whether they are here today. I would like to thank the
interpreters for interpreting for us.

	I would like to thank the staff of the Truth Commission, their hard work
so that this hearing can be a success. I would like to thank Pila Qombo
for showing marks of leadership. When we had a problem with electricity
he tried to help us. He showed decisive leadership by looking for
alternatives. I would like to thank Pila very much. If you only relied on
the electricity we would have had a problem.

	Again, I would like to thank Siyabonga. Siyabonga has shown me something
that I never, never imagined to be a briefer. First of all Siyabonga is a
man, a young man, a handsome young man. I never thought such a young man
would be able to take a responsibility to comfort people. We associate
this job with old woman. Such a young man, his responsibilities is to
look for ladies around here in this hearing. He has taken the work of an
older person and he did what he did. Siyabonga, thank you for what you
have shown us. It has touched me, it has touched me particularly and the
way in which you have done it. Moreover you are a statement taker, this
is not your job.

	I would like also to thank the local social workers, those who were
helping us in this hearing. They volunteered to help us so that this
hearing can be a success and all the people who helped us. I would like
to thank the press for their patience during a very difficult hearing.
Last of all, I would like to thank the panel. Tiny Maya, for sharing the
hearing, yesterdays hearing together with June Crichton and Professor
Magwaza who left yesterday. I would like to thank Ntsiki Sandi, Mkibisi
Xundu who is not here. It has been a difficult week, but it has been a
very good week in terms of this hearing. Thank you very much. God bless
you.

	Lastly, we will have interview together with the press. People who want
to listen to this, they can do so, but they can do it quietly. Those who
want to go out, they may go out now. Thank you.

	------------------------------

